When he woke in the woods, in the dark and the cold of the night, he'd reach out to touch the child sleeping beside him. Nights dark beyond darkness, and
the days more gray, each one what had gone before, like the onset of some cold glaucoma, dimming away the world. His
hand rose and fell softly with each precious breath. He pushed away the plastic tarpulin and raised himself in
the stinking robes and blankets and looked toward the east for any light,
but there was none. In the dream from which he'd wakened, he had wandered in a cave where the child led him by the hand. Their light plain over the wet
flow stone walls, like pilgrims in a fable, swallowed up and lost among the inward parts of some grrenitic beast.
Deep stone flues where the water dripped and sang tolling in the silence the minutes of the earth and the hours and the days of it years without cease.
Till they stood in a great stone room where lay a black and ancient lake. And on the far shore a creature that raised
its dripping mouth from the rimstone pool and stared into the light with eyes dead white and sightless as the eggs of spiders.
It swung its head low over the water as if to take the sin of what it could not see. Crouching there, pale and naked and
translucent, its alabaster bones cast up in shadow on the rocks behind it. Its boughels, its beating heart, the brain
that pulsed in a dull glass bell. It swung its head from side to side and then gave out a low moan and turned and
lurched away and loped soundlessly into the dark.
In my junior year of high school, our English and literature class had a focus on American literature, specifically many of the famous American poets. So that year, we covered Dickinson,
Emerson, Poe. But as with most high school English classes, there were some novels thrown in throughout the year that we were supposed to read and write
book reports on. And some of the books we read that year were interesting, like Lord of the Flies and Hatchet. But for reasons I'm sure a lot of you can relate
to. I think a lot of my enjoyment for those stories was pulled away because it was homework. Also, importantly, I was 16 and stupid. But, you know, even the
best of stories can come off as a drag sometimes if you're being forced to do them. But, there was one book we read that year that that didn't apply to. My
junior English teacher was a man named Mr. Lockhart. And there was one book that he had taught years before in his previous American literature course that
when he got this new class, my class, he demanded he could teach again. This intrigued me for a couple reasons. For one, it's weird to see a teacher so
passionate to get one specific book into the curriculum. And two, I had heard about this book before. Because as a
young kid into creepy pastas and scary movies and spooky stories, many regarded this book as one of the darkest stories ever written. Not to mention that some
parts of the book were set in the town that I grew up. So if all those details had my interest, what hooked it was the first day we talked about the book. I
remember so distinctly Mr. Lockheart standing in front of the class and reading a few of the lines from the first pages of the story. And as he did,
he began to cry, apologizing to the class and saying that this story is one that's very powerful to him and one that's very impactful to any father. For
the first time I could remember, I was excited to do my homework and I went home that night and read the entire book. That story became what is still
today my favorite book and it introduced me to my favorite author. But more than that, it ignited an already kindling love of stories that I had into a fire.
That fire continued to burn until I had to make a YouTube channel to talk about some of my favorites. So, my favorite book and the one that directly led me to
talking in front of a camera to you all now is Cormick McCarthy's The Road. The Road is a story that's so special to me, I've been hesitant to talk about it.
Sure, I've talked about McCarthy's other works like No Country for Old Men and Blood Meridian, the second of which being one of the most popular videos on
the channel. But anytime I would think about talking about the road, I'd be almost scared to. Like, how do you talk about something that means so much to you personally? I mean, what if you miss something or you get something wrong?
But as many of you know, I recently became a father. And one of the core points of this book is fatherhood. So, I guess now is as good of a time as ever.
And I should probably also tell you what this book's about. The road follows a father and son as they make their way through a post-apocalyptic America. We
get some clues as to what the apocalypse might have been, but for the sake of the story, it doesn't matter. What matters is the relationship between the father
and son as they brave this horrifying new world. a world full of such terrible occurrences that it's given the book the reputation as one of the darkest stories
ever written, which I'm going to give a big viewer discretion to this whole video. The book deals with topics like cannibalism and child death and other
things you've come to know and love on this channel. I would never call the book gratuitous, especially because of the context in which these events show
up, but it is there if you're sensitive to that. And of course, most importantly, The Road to Me is a very important book. It's a once in
a-lifetime experience, and it's not one that I want to ruin for you. So, there will be a link to the book in the description below. Please check it out
for yourself first, and then come back and we can talk about it. Stories like this are too important to let your first experience be made murky with someone's
interpretation. But aside from just the literal events described, the philosophy of the book is so interesting. sometimes conveyed through dreams like what you
heard at the start of the video, the opening words of the book, sometimes hinted through characters and dialogue.
It all comes together to create a narrative that is so cohesive and compelling that I am equally excited as I am nervous to talk about it. So
hopefully you decide to talk about it with me. And if all this sounds interesting to you, then stick around after the ad as we talk about the misery and fire of Cormick McCarthy's The Road.
While it might be fun to read about someone starving to death, you shouldn't do that to yourself. But now, healthy, delicious meals have never been easier.
Thanks to today's sponsor, Factor. Factor delivers fresh, never frozen,
chef crafted, and dietitian approved meals straight to your door. They're ready to heat and eat in just 2 minutes,
and they're designed to support your wellness journey. Factor can help eliminate the stress around cooking,
planning, or cleanup, so you can stay focused on your goals. Every week,
Factor has over 100 rotating meal options. and not just meals, but things like salads, shakes, breakfast, and more. They're doubling up on things like
their protein options and their seafood options. And they can accommodate any dietary restriction you have, such as keto, gluten, or you can even swap
protein options to fit whatever is right for you. And as I mentioned, there's virtually no prep or cleanup as they're ready to make in just 2 minutes. Most of
us get short on time, so we neglect our health in order to eat something that's cheap and quick. But now you can have something that's cheap and quick and
good for you and tastes really good as well. Backtor will send me meals for things that I think have no business being in the microwave. Things like fish
or tofu or steak. Somehow whatever they're doing to their food just works.
And I believe a lot of it comes down to their food quality. Factor bans over 175 ingredients. Things like refined seed oils or artificial sugars in order to
give you nutrient-dense foods that focused on your energy and health. As of late, Factor hasn't sent me a meal I haven't liked. It feels like I'm having
a cheat day without the guilt. So, if you want to get in on this fantastic product, then now's the perfect time.
That's because if you head to factor75.com or click the link in the description and use code windagon FB50, you'll get 50%
off your first Factor box plus free breakfast for a year. That's right, half off your first box and free breakfast
for a year while your subscription lasts. Again, head to the link in the description at factor75.com and use code windagonf50 to get in on this incredible
offer today. Thank you all for watching the ad. Thank you to Factor for sponsoring the channel. Their link will be in the description. We are now back
to the video. We are going to go ahead and get into it, but as always, thank you for watching. Also, I feel like I should point out uh I'm not just wearing
a bandage to like cosplay. I wrecked a dirt bike because I'm stupid. But if there ever was a time to be stupid, it
would be now because it matches the aesthetics for this video. Anyway, in the opening of the book is a dedication
to Cor McCarthy's son, John Francis McCarthy. John was born in 1999,
according to the internet. So, at the time of the book's publication, he would have been 6 or 7 years old. Because of that, it's apparent, as Corormick would
later go on to state, that his relationship with his son was his influence for the story. We already got some of the key ideas of the book out of
the way in the introduction. The world is dark in a way that's hard to imagine.
We'll later see that the sun itself is blotted out by a gray sky. So, if the day is that dark, you could imagine how dark it is at night. Dark beyond dark,
as the story says. The condition of the man and the boy is dire. Food, as you can imagine, is scarce. The world has been like this for some years now. Their
clothes and blankets stink. Filth upon filth. Years of rot and decay. We can imagine the two of them emaciated and
suffering and not too far from dead. But in the midst of this misery, there's a light. The light being the boy,
something that's personified in the father's first dream. He walks through a dark cave as the child's light guides him. But regardless of the light,
there's something monstrous in here.
Something horrific, growling, and ancient. At the back of this cave, or this world he finds himself in in the dream, the boy is precious, but there's
a monster around the corner. We have further clues to the state of the world in the first lines after the dream. With the first gray light, he rose and left
the boy sleeping and walked out to the road and squatted and studied the country to the south, barren, silent,
godless. He thought the month was October, but he wasn't sure. He hadn't kept a calendar for years. They were
moving south. There'd be no surviving another winter here. As I said, no one's seen the sun for years. Along with the darkness, the world has brought a
coldness to it. As we'll see, everywhere it seems to snow and freeze, but in the north, winters are particularly rough.
So, with no other objective, the man and his boy are going south. There's a few narrative dynamics that need no introduction. Like, in several
instances, it's the job of the writer to make you care about characters within a story, or at least care about their relationship. If we're introduced to two
people, the story needs to establish if they hate each other, love each other,
if they're here by their own decisions or someone else's, etc. But there's a few relationships that kind of cut through the red tape. For example, if
you show a husband and wife, it's assumed that they like each other. The same can be said about brother and sister, mother and daughter, and father
and son. Now, obviously, these relationships don't have to be typical.
The writer can subvert expectations wherever they want. But when we hear those titles, we naturally assume a bond. So with his father taking his son
to the south, normally that would be all we need to assume these two care about each other. But in spite of that,
McCarthy gives one of the most powerful mandates that I think I've ever heard in a story. After looking at the countryside through his binoculars, the
story says he lowered the glasses and pulled down the cotton mask from his face and wiped his nose on the back of his wrist and then glassed the country
again. Then he just sat there holding the binoculars and watching the ash and daylight congeal over the land. He knew
only that the child was his warrant. He said, "If he is not the word of God, God never spoke." Earlier when I said my
junior English teacher cried reading the opening lines of the story, this is the line he cried during. It is such a powerful line that so succinctly
encapsulates the idea that our father is setting out with. The world is empty. it is dead and there is no good to be had.
But if there is a god, then he looks like that. It gives us the idea that the father isn't doing all of this just to save his son, but for some greater
purpose for humanity's sake, as if the child himself is a vessel. He's the last carrier of something that the world seems to have forgotten. This idea of
God, or the closest thing we have to God, will continue throughout the story.
Also, the father and the son will never be named. They are simply called the man and the boy. McCarthy does this a lot in his works. Like the protagonist from
Blood Meridian was just known as the kid. Because in that story, his name didn't matter. He was the witness. His inclusion, if there was any in the
atrocities the Glanton gang committed was omitted. Because the core of the story was about how everything affected him. If the things he saw changed him as
a person for better or worse by the time of the story's end. In that way, the kid was a stand-in for something greater. a pseudonym for true humanity that
witnessed atrocities and allowed them to pass by without delay. Because of that,
he doesn't need a name. He's just the kid. And here in this story, the man and the boy are much the same, but we'll talk about how later. We get some
description as to how the two of them live. All of their belongings are in a grocery cart, one they undoubtedly scavenge from some decrepit grocery
store and now used to haul all of their belongings, from tarbs to old cornmeal cakes. Food is scarce, but the man rations what food he has between him and
the boy. Much of the dialogue between the man and the boy feels authentic.
There are very few moments of them pondering things or telling stories or describing the world around them. I mean, they've been in this world for
years now. Any conversation like that they've already had. Instead, most of their dialogue is simply what it needs to be, reassurances. The boy turned in the blankets, then he opened his eyes.
"Hi, Papa," he said. I'm right here. I know.
Just a simple assurance that the father is here and the boy is safe. This is also a good time to point out if you're not familiar with McCarthy's work that
he doesn't like punctuation. Like straight up, he has said before, "Why would I want to cover up the page in silly little marks, so he just doesn't
do it." I didn't even know you could do that before I started reading his stuff.
If you don't like quotation marks or colons or semicolons, you just pretend like they don't exist, I guess. Because of that, moments of dialogue like that
are just text on the page that occurs after each other. The only indicator we get that the speaker has switched is a new indent. But because of the way
different characters speak and flow in dialogue, it's not really confusing as to who's talking. Now, sure, part of that is McCarthy's skill as a writer,
but also like 99% of the dialogue is between a grown man and a child, so there's normally not a lot of wiggle
room. The father pushes the grocery cart that has an old motorcycle mirror attached to it. That way, he can always keep his eyes forward, but have an idea if something's coming behind them.
Animals in this world seem to be completely extinct. But there's other people out there. In addition to that,
both he and the boy have on a backpack to carry essential things in case they need to ditch the shopping cart. The only weapon they have is an old
revolver, a revolver of which they only have two bullets. As they press on into the day, the story says, "Then they set out along the black top in the gunmetal
light, shuffling through the ash. Each the others swirled entire." The only translator understanding the boy has for
the world around him, is the man. And the only thing that makes sense to the man, the only thing worth pushing on for is the boy. The two need each other in a way that's hard to put into words.
There's also the mention of them shuffling through the ash. Again, we don't know exactly how this apocalypse happened, but we know it involved a lot of fire, or the very least, it caused a
lot of fire. Perhaps a meteor hit the Earth. Perhaps there was some massive solar event. Perhaps a nuclear war.
Whatever it is, it killed all plant life, killed out all animal life, and has almost killed out all human life. In addition to this, ash rains around the
world constantly like snow. It hangs in the air and coats everything. In most apocalyptic stories, there is a hope for a world beyond, regardless if it's
zombies or a disease outbreak or natural disasters. These stories are normally underlined by the idea of a reward at
the end of perseverance. If I can get through this, things will get better. If I can get through this, humanity will be okay. But the road's unique in the idea that nothing will ever be okay again.
Humanity is not dying. We are extinct.
And the survivors just haven't got that memo yet. Now, it's not like the road is the only story to have an inevitable extinction of humanity. Given some of
the things we're going to see, it's certainly one of the most depressing. As they're walking, the two of them come to an old gas station. Everything there's been looted. If not in the immediate aftermath of this apocalyptic event,
then in the years since of other travelers like themselves passing by.
However, as they're making their way through the gas station, the story says this. He went into the office, dust and ash everywhere. The boy stood in the
door. a metal desk, cash register, some old automotive manuals, swollen and soden. The lenolum was stained and
curling from the leaking roof. He crossed to the desk and stood there.
Then he picked up the phone and dialed the number of his father's house in that long ago. The boy watched him. "What are
you doing?" he said. This is such an interesting little moment and one that I haven't seen discussed enough regarding
this book because there's this subtle underlining throughout the book of the father's declining mentality or if not
necessarily a decline, a rejection of the state he finds himself in. I believe the father here knew that this was a senseless act, but it was an act
nonetheless and one that he could do. In a world where so much agency was ripped from him, it's been a while since he picked up a phone and called his dad's
house. And of course, there's the obvious connection between him being the father now and trying to call someone who will never pick up, someone who was
a father to him. They get a little bit away from the gas station before the father remarks that they're being sloppy. There's more stuff they could have salvaged from there that other
people have left. So, they go back, take all the empty oil quarts, and turn them upside down into one oil jug. By the time they're done, they have a half
quart of motor oil. Oil that they can use for their campsite lantern. The boy remarks that this means his dad can read him a story tonight. Obviously, the most human element of the book is the boy.
He's a picture of innocence in a world that's long since forgotten. So, because of that, moments like that, where the boy is excited in the midst of everything that his dad gets to read him
at bedtime story is refreshing, but stands in almost comedic contrast to the world around him. And moments like that further emphasize to us what the father
sees in him. Even if you're at your wits end and want it all to be over, if your son asked you to read a story, how could you not keep pushing on? For the two, it
seems that every night is a fight against the elements. The world is cold in the day, and it is freezing at night.
Add to this that rainstorms seem to be near constant. They keep tarps with them to lay over top of them as they sleep curled into each other. Being too cold
can be a problem, but being too cold and wet is dangerous. So, in one of their first nights, when they see it beginning to rain, they put a tarp over the
shopping cart and make their way to a large rock. Grilling up in the dry dirt under the rock for the night. In the deep dark, the boy asks if it's okay if
they can leave the lamp on for a little bit. To which the father replies, "Yes,
of course, we can." Logically, this doesn't make any sense. They need to conserve their resources. But to the father, what point is there beyond making his son comfortable? That night,
laying in the dark under the stone, the two have this conversation. He was a long time going to sleep. After a while,
he turned and looked at the man. His face in the small light stre with black from the rain like some old world thespian. "Can I ask you something?" he
said. "Yes, of course." "Are we going to die?" "Sometime. Not now." "And we're
still going south?" "Yes." So, we'll be warm. Yes. Okay.
Okay. For what? Nothing. Just Okay. Go to sleep. Okay. I'm going to blow out the lamp. Is that okay?
Yes, that's okay. And then later in the darkness, can I ask you something?
Yes, of course you can. What would you do if I died? If you died, I would want to die, too.
So you could be with me? Yes. So I could be with you. Okay.
This is what I mean by most of the dialogue feels like what it would be,
just reassurances. The boy afraid that they're going to die and the father correcting him and then saying that if the boy were to die, his father would be right behind him to make sure he's safe.
There's a few moments that most often happen after the father and son have a conversation where it seems McCarthy
kind of muses on the nature of this all semi from the father's perspective but also semi from some greater omnisient
narrator's perspective. Like here's the first one after that conversation. He lay listening to the water drip in the woods bedrock. This the cold and the
silence. The ashes of the late world carried on the bleak and temporal winds to and fro in the void. Carried forth and scattered carried forth again.
Everything uncoupled from its shoring unsupported in the ash and air sustained by a breath trembling brief.
If only my heart were stone.
See, otherwise this could just be descriptions of the world. But that use of my at the end is interesting because the book is written from a third person omnisient perspective. Sure, we're with
the father and son the whole time, but neither of them are the ones telling the story. The story is about the two of them, not from one of the two of them.
Now, you could say perhaps this final sentence, if only my heart were stone,
is just something the father saying to himself. But it's here where McCarthy's lack of punctuation almost becomes an agent within the story. Because if there
were quotation marks, we'd know for sure if this was the narrator speaking or if this was the father speaking. But because we don't have that, everything's
drawn into question. Is this entire paragraph the father thinking to himself? Is this instead McCarthy as the narrator having his heart break over the
notion of this situation? I also find the language used in that paragraph to be interesting. The description that everything is uncoupled, untethered from
its shoring. I mean, the world's been made into ash. ash that's in the air that floats around with your breath is from every part of the world all at once. It describes the air as
unsupported, trembling, and brief and then says, "I wish my heart was stone."
Drawing the connection between someone's heart and the world around it. Again,
this could all be from the father's perspective, but it also points to the idea that perhaps there's something greater at play. I won't necessarily say
the supernatural, but the story certainly has hintings of a power, of some force, of some agency, of some
design. I mean, that was kind of defined by the father's commission. If the boy were not the word of God, then God never spoke. Meaning, God or something godlike
must be out there that gave this child to this man. It's not an accident that he is here to protect him. Because of
that, moments like this where we get these musings or we get these little descriptors, especially after the father and son speak almost feel like they're coming from God or something godlike.
That whatever power exists in the universe, whatever power put these two together is watching them. Some sense we are reading a book and this might as
well be the narrator, right? But it seems that nearly the narrator is a part of the story that there is some force watching them and his heart breaks for
the boy and the father. This idea of a greater agency will be touched on more as we go along. But for now, it seems they've come to the same conclusion we
have. What a horrible thing for a son to have to ask his father. And immediately after this, it seems that the father has his own questions for this higher power
as well. He woke before dawn and watched the gray day break. Slow and half opaque. He rose while the boy slept and
pulled on his shoes and wrapped in his blanket, he walked out through the trees. He descended into a gri in the stone and there he crouched coughing. He
coughed for a long time. Then he just knelt in the ashes. He raised his face to the paling day.
"Are you there?" he whispered. "Will I see you at last? Have you a neck by which to throttle you? Have you a heart?
Damn you eternally. Have you a soul?"
"Oh, God," he whispered. "Oh, God." If the story wasn't depressing enough,
we're now dealt another crushing reality. Dad's dying. The worst part about it is he knows it. His boy can't be more than eight, maybe 9 years old.
This world is harsh and violent, and it's kill or be killed. And the father knows that if he's gone, what chance does his son have? So, he makes his
appeal to heaven and it's one out of anger. Not to stave off his own death for his sake. If it were up to him,
that'd probably be something comforting by now. But the misery that he must die for his son's sake, crying out to God,
saying, "If he has a throat, he'll choke him. And if he could damn him, he would." From his perspective, it seems to be a cruel joke. God commissioned him
to take care of this boy. Now he's going to take him out of the picture before he can. The two of them walk through the next day and come across a burned city.
Nothing to scavenge as all has been made to ash. These fires, whatever they came from, swept up forests, cities, roads,
cars, and people. As they're walking through the streets, they see the bodies of many, charred and dried. In the midst of this, he pulls the boy into him and
says, "The things you put into your head are there forever." The boy asks, "You forget some things, don't you?" And the father says, "Yes, you forget what you
want to remember, and you remember what you want to forget." Immediately after this, we get a flashback of the father's life, something the father would probably want to forget. It's just a
simple description of a day he and his uncle went out to collect firewood. They went out on a boat, collected firewood,
and relaxed on the lake afterwards. It was a quiet day, but at the end it says,
"This was the perfect day of his childhood. This the day to shape the days upon." This memory works twofold for the father. Well, normally you may
think memories of the good times are a relief, something to hold on to. But in a world like this, that lake isn't there anymore. His uncle isn't there anymore,
and days like that are never coming back. So, in contrast, now it's almost like a ghost that haunts him. something so perfect that he'll never see again.
And to the boy, it's something unfathomable. We'll learn later that the boy was born after the world came to be this. Things like that, things like
relaxing or collecting firewood or times of leisure are just ideas. It shows a dissonance between the father and son,
but also a misery for the father. The boy is unbburdened by things he wants to forget. The world simply is. There is no greater point to try to go back to or
one to sulk over. Perhaps the reason he can keep his humanity is because he's unbburdened by the idea of a greater one. The two of them continue south.
Regardless of their direction, things are getting colder. So cold that the father falls asleep clutching his son,
counting his breaths in the night. The story remarks that if they got any rain on them, they'd probably die. I know a lot of what I'm doing here is talking
about narrative moments where things change in the story or quote unquote important moments of reflection, but I
also don't want it to be lost how impressive some of McCarthy's writing is. Again, I highly recommend you get the book for yourself and experience it firsthand. But to give you an idea,
there's so many passages that sound like this. The blackness he woke to on those nights was sightless and impenetrable. a blackness to hurt your eyes with
listening. Often he had to get up. No sound but the wind and the bare and blackened trees. He rose and stood
tottering in that cold autistic dark with his arms out held for balance while the vestibular calculations in his skull cranked out their reckonings. An old
chronicle to seek out the upright. No fall but proceeded by declination.
He took great marching steps into the nothingness, counting them against his return. Eyes closed, arms or upright to what? Something nameless in the night.
Load or matrix to which he and the stars were common satellite like the great pendulum in its rotunda describing
through the long day movements of the universe of which you may say it knows nothing and yet know it must. It's just
such beautiful poetry describing his movements through a darkness that he might as well shut his eyes to keep his bearings to not trick his mind to try to
bring in another sense it's not going to get anything from. And it describes him moving in this way as some device from the stars. Something looking for a
greater uprightness that seems etched into the cosmos. All this to describe a man stumbling through the dark. In the midst of this misery, the boy is still
being a boy. They have masks they wear over their face to keep them from breathing in too much ash, which, you know, is a relative statement. And the
boy drew fangs on his because he's a kid and he thinks it looks cool. As they're walking, one day it begins to snow.
Previously, he would set up in the morning and look with binoculars to see any smoke rising from some distant fire,
but here it seems there are none. The story says he thought the blood cults must have all consumed one another. No one traveled this road. No road agents,
no marauders, blood cults. What do you mean blood cults and marauders? Well, as you can imagine, in a world as rough as
this, those that have stayed alive have done so through mostly terrible means.
Again, it's something further that separates the father and son from the world around them. It also points to why the father always keeps the gun on his belt. Because if someone's alive for this long, there's probably a reason.
They come to an old garage and the father fix a squeaky wheel on their shopping cart. As he uses a saw and bolts and screws, the story says that the boy set watching his every move.
Everything that the father does, the boy takes in. Again, he's his whole world.
After leaving the garage, the story says, "In the morning, they went on desolate country. A borehide nailed to a
barn door. Ratty wisp of a tail. Inside the barn, three bodies hanging from the rafters.
tried and dusty among the wand slats of light. There could be something here,
boy said. There could be some corn or something. Let's go, the man said. It's one of many times in the story we will
see the aftermath of some tragedy. We don't know why these three people were hung in the barn, but it's probably over something that doesn't matter now. The
world is graffitied in these little moments of violence. the final image or the standing portrait of moments of hatred or moments of anger. All around
the two of them, humanity has presented their epitap of agony. And once again,
it's the contrast to this that make a little boy drawing fangs on his mask all the more special. Not despite the violence around them, but because of it,
it makes him sacred. As you can imagine,
one of the most precious resources to them is food. They have a few provisions that they ration out, but it's hard to scavenge anything. I mean, obviously,
when the world began to fall apart,
people took what they could, but then anything that wasn't taken then has been taken over the several years of people traveling the same road. As you could
imagine, they're always hungry. But the father always finds just enough to keep them alive. At night, when he's not making sure the boy is breathing, the
man is tormented, not only by his own paranoia. At one point, it says he thinks he hears bulrums out in the hills for a moment before the sound is gone,
but by things he sees in his dreams,
things he probably wishes he could forget. In his dreams, his pale bride came to him out of a green and leafy canopy. Her nipples pipe clay and her
ribbones painted white. She wore a dress of gauze and her dark hair was carried up in combs of ivory, combs of shell.
Her smile, her downturned eyes. In the morning, it was snowing again. Beads of small gray eyes strung along the light wires overhead.
He mistrusted all of that. He said the right dreams for a man in peril were dreams of peril and all else was the call of langor and of death. He slept
little and he slept poorly. He dreamt of walking in a flowering wood where birds flew before them. He and the child and
the sky was aching blue, but he was learning how to wake himself from just such siren worlds. Lying there in the dark with the uncanny taste of a peach
from some phantom orchard fading in his mouth. He thought if he lived long enough, the world at last would all be lost.
Like the dying world the newly blind inhabit. All of it slowly fading from memory.
From daydreams on the road, there was no waking plotted on. He could remember everything of her save her scent. Seated in the theater with her beside him,
leaning forward, listening to the music,
gold scroll work and scones and the tall columner folds of the drapes at either side of the stage. She held his hand in her lap and he could feel the tops of
her stockings through the thin stuff of her summer dress. Freeze this frame. Now call down your dark and your cold and be
damned. As you could imagine, if he is a father and this is his son, then at one point there was a woman. A woman who is gone now, but one who visits him in his
dreams. In his dreams, he sees her as something goddy, something apart from the world he's in now. and the dreams of her in combination with the dreams of
bright blue summer days of birds of him with his son. All of these are siren calls. Something luring him to the other side of death. Something unobtainable
with the life and body he has now. But even in the day, he can't stop thinking of her. Can't stop thinking of dates they had at theaters. Moments of joy, of
boyhood, of love that are all extinct now. And he's simply the last dinosaur that remembered what all the others look like. Again, all of this paints the
misery of everything. All the things that we know to be moments of joy, moments we look forward to don't exist.
But McCarthy counters that with what the father does with his son. He fashioned sweeps from two old brooms he'd found and wired them to the cart to clear the
limbs from the road in front of the wheels and stood on the rear rail like a dog musher. And they set off down the hills, guiding the cart on the curves
with their bodies in the manner of bobslutters. It was the first that he'd seen the boy smile in a long time.
Similar to what I said earlier, the perfect day that haunts the father. To the boy, this might as well be the perfect day. Things like joy and hope
only exist in him. And in a world drained of those things, it's like the father is transporting the cure across a diseased wasteland. The boy is special
because he is the boy. What else is there? While walking, the father and son come to an old dam, and the father explains to the son how dams work. It's
worth pointing out here that we're never told explicitly the route the father and son take, but there are certainly clues that give us a pretty good idea. I mean,
they start somewhere in the countryside and make their way down south. And there are several landmarks they pass throughout the story that are real landmarks in the United States. I think
the first description we get that gives us a location is likely that of Middlesborough, Kentucky, as it talks about the father and son coming over a
gap in the mountains, the Cumberland Gap, and then continuing on their way south till they get to a city with a large dam and a large bridge. This is
most likely Knoxville, Tennessee. This would make sense because Knoxville,
Tennessee is where Cormick McCarthy is originally from. Well, he was born in Rhode Island. He moved to Knoxville,
Tennessee, and grew up there. and his first several books are set there. It wasn't until he wrote Blood Meridian in 1985 that he moved to Texas and spent the rest of his life in El Paso. So,
because most of his early books are set in Knoxville and the father and son are walking through locations that seem similar to the Appalachins and
Knoxville, we can assume that's where our story takes place. I mean, right after the dam, they come across an old red barn that has Sea Rock City painted
on the roof. There's a lookout point in northern Georgia, right on the border of Chattanooga, Tennessee, called Rock City. To advertise it, back in the 50s,
they had a marketing campaign where they would paint these large red barns across Tennessee, Kentucky, and the Carolinas.
These red barns would be near the interstate and would have black roofs and white letters that simply said Sea Rock City. These red barns became a
staple of the South. I remember we had a Sea Rock City barn birdhouse when I was a kid. Barnes like this were all over the Knoxville area. There's a pretty
compelling paper that was written by Wesley G. Morgan called the route and roots of the road. I'll have it linked in the description where Morgan goes
through the descriptions of the book and gives a pretty convincing account of the exact roads they took, which on a map looks something like this, which the
short version is we start to get descriptors in Middlesborough, Kentucky, and then they go south to Hargate,
Tennessee. Then they made their way west to go through Speedwall, Lefalid, and Lake City, Tennessee. I don't know why they wouldn't keep going south through
like Tazwell and Maynardville. Then they go through the interstate exchanges at Knoxville and get on US 441. And then from there they make their way around
Gatlinburgg and shoot into the Carolinas. That probably means nothing to most of you who are listening to this, but as an East Tennessee boy, um,
you know, we got to get our licks in when we can. An interesting point to take away from their route is, as mentioned, it's not entirely direct.
Like McCarthy grew up here. He knows how the roads work. So, choices he had, like the two of them traveling west to see
the dam and then looping back into Knoxville rather than just staying south and getting there quicker, point to either A, the father knew those roads
were down for a reason, or B, the father wants to show these things to his son,
something that will be evident when they get to South Knoxville here in a minute.
The two of them pass by an old farmhouse where they find some blankets. Then they find a derelict grocery store of which all the food has been taken away. But
out front is a destroyed vending machine. Sure enough, inside the father finds a Coca-Cola. What is it, Papa?
It's a treat for you.
What is it? Here, sit down. He slipped the boy's knapsack straps loose and set the pack on the floor behind him, and he put his thumbnail under the aluminum
clip on the top of the can and opened it. He leaned his nose to the slight fizz coming from the can and then handed
it to the boy. "Go ahead," he said. The boy took the can. "It's bubbly," he said. "Go ahead." He looked at his father, then tilted the can and drank.
He sat there thinking about it. "It's really good," he said. "Yes, it is. You have some, Papa. I want you to drink
it." "You have some." He took the can and sipped it and handed it back. "You drink it," he said. "Let's just sit here."
It's because I won't ever get to drink another one, isn't it? Ever is a long time. Okay, the boy said again. These
little moments of what used to be a father sharing a Coke with his son.
Things that previously were taken for granted, but they mean so much in this world. It's also kind of funny hearing names like Coca-Cola and Rock City mentioned here. Relics of something now
long gone with meanings that most have forgotten. After passing over what is likely the Henley Street Bridge leading to South Knoxville and seeing the
wreckage of destroyed and sunken boats in the water, the man takes the boy to his old house. In real life, Cormick McCarthy grew up in a house in South Knoxville. So, in a sort of meta moment,
the father from the story grew up in a house in the same location. The boy stood looking at it. The peeling wooden clabards were largely gone from the
lower walls for firewood, leaving the studs and the insulation exposed. The rotted screening from the back porch lay on the concrete terrace.
Are we going in? Why not? I I'm scared.
Don't you want to see where I used to live? No. It'll be okay. There could be somebody here. I don't think so. But
suppose there is. He stood looking up at the gable to his old room. He looked at the boy. Do you want to wait here? No.
You always say that. I'm sorry. I know,
but you do. We'll get to the father's nostalgia for his childhood home in a minute, but there's another interesting note here that we see for the first
time. The boy seems to be afraid of homes. This won't be the last time this happens. There's several points in the story where he's afraid of entering a
house. Now, on the surface, this sounds counterintuitive. I mean, they're constantly afraid of getting rained on or freezing to death. So, you think the
boy would take comfort in being inside of a structure. There's a couple reasons I think the boy might feel this way. For one, I think the boy may not like the houses from a practical sense. I mean,
it's not like any of these houses are insulated or have beds or safe rooms.
So, from an objective point, it's just a place as cold as any other where it's harder to see what's coming for you. If the home offers no heat or security,
then it might as well be a series of mazes and doors that you're unfamiliar with. At least on the road, you can see something before it gets to you. But I also think there might be a psychological reason for the boy's fear.
As mentioned earlier, the world we live in, the world that his father grew up in is just an echo. He sees cars,
buildings, products, but all these things are just concepts. They're fairy tales that his dad talks about. So because of that, these homes are a sort of remnant of that lost existence.
They're structures that at one time not only provided security, but identity, of ownership, of pride for the people that lived in them. But now they're just
pieces of wood that were moved from the forest to somewhere else. From the boy's perspective, it probably feels like walking in a graveyard. That's
reinforced by his father's behavior in the home. All much as he'd remembered it. The room's empty. In the small room off the dining room, there was a bare
iron cot, a metal folding table, the same cast iron coal grade in the small fireplace. The pine paneling was gone
from the walls, leaving just the furring strips. He stood there. He felt with his thumb in the painted wood of the mantel the pin holes from ts that held
stockings 40 years ago. This is where we used to have Christmas when I was a boy.
He turned and looked out at the waist of the yard. A tangle of dead lilac the shape of a hedge. On cold winter nights when the electricity was out in a storm,
we would sit at the fire here, me and my sisters, doing our homework.
The boy watched him watch shapes claiming him he could not see.
We should go, Papa, he said. "Yes," the man said. But he didn't. I love that
description of someone being reclaimed by their remembrance shapes claiming him that the boy could not see. But of course, these points have to be
terrifying to the boy because they're all things the boy has no concept of.
And sure, he's heard about them, but he has no experience with sisters or homework or Christmas. Again, it's the dad digging up memories from a world the
boys never lived in. They walked through the dining room where the fire brick in the hearth was as yellow as the day it was laid because his mother could not
bear to see it blackened. The floor buckled from the rainwater. In the living room, the bones of a small animal dismembered and placed in a pile,
possibly a cat. Glass tumbler by the door. The boy gripped his hand. They went up the stairs and turned and went
down the hallway. Small cones of damp plaster standing in the floor. The wooden lathes of the ceiling exposed. He
stood in the doorway to his room. Small space under the eaves.
This is where I used to sleep. My c was against this wall. in the nights in their thousands to dream the dreams of a
child's imaginings. Worlds rich or fearful such as might offer themselves but never the one to be. Pushed open the
closet door half expecting to find his childhood things. Rockhold daylight fell through from the roof. Gray as his heart.
We should go, Papa. Can we go?
Yes, we can go. I'm scared. I I know. I I'm sorry. I'm really scared. It It's all right. We shouldn't have come.
Similar to the father trying to dial his father's phone number and dreaming of a woman he's lost. It's like his brain
can't let go of what used to be because how could it? But to the boy, his father keeps trying to resurrect spirits that might as well be folklore. And as the
father said earlier, a man in peril should have dreams of peril because dreams of what was might as well be a call from the grave. It's almost reminiscent of someone going through a
breakup. Even though they know they shouldn't, they can't help but think about the relationship. Think about all the good times they have. Even if it's self-destructive and bad for them, and
they know that it seems easier than letting go. But here, the thing that pulls him out of his childhood house,
and the same thing that encourages him to keep going, not give in to the seduction of what used to be is his son.
If there is ever a reason to get over it and move on, it's him. Days later, they sleep on the side of the road and feel a massive earthquake. Seems that these
things tend to come and go from time to time. The world is physically falling apart as it's already falling apart society. As said, the story isn't one
that's going to have a happy ending for humanity. Our fates been sealed by the setting itself. We then get a passage that tells us a little bit of what the
road looked like right when the apocalypse began. In those first years,
the roads were people with refugees shrouded up in their clothing, wearing masks and goggles, sitting in their rags by the side of the road like ruined
aviators. Their barrerows heaped with shoddy towing wagons or carts, their eyes bright in their skulls. Creedless
shells of men tottering down the causeways like migrants in a feverland.
The ferality of everything revealed at last. Old and troubling issues resolved into nothingness at night. The last
instance of a thing takes the class with it. Turns out the light and is gone. Look around you. Ever is a long time.
But the boy knew what he knew. That ever is no time at all. I love the line, the last instance of a thing takes the class
with it. Because if you're at the end of the line, then what's the point in carrying on tradition? But in this sense, the boy almost has a wisdom. Ever is no time at all. Regardless of how long humanity has existed or will exist,
it exists right now. The boy has no concern for what used to be, just what is. One night, as the father watches the boy sleeping, the story says, "Can you do it?" When the time comes, can you?
Now, again, this could be the father speaking to himself, but it could also be this omnisient narrator speaking to the father. When the time comes, well,
you have the strength to do it. We'll see what this it is later, but it's again the idea that there is some greater something looking over their
journey. If not guiding it, at least watching it. There's an importance here in the father's mission that's hard to state. Around this time, we get another
mention of this she. The she being the woman that the father dreams of, the mother of the boy. The father thinking to himself that she was right when she
said the boy was all that stood between the father and death. Again, this notion seems accurate from what we've seen of the father's resolve. But it also tells
us that this she, this her was around when this apocalypse kicked off. So, how did he lose her? How's it just the two
of them now? They continue south and make their way through the burned remnants of a resort town. This town is most likely Gatlinburgg or Seirville or
Pigeon Forge, Tennessee. As they're making their way over the Smoky Mountains into the Carolinas, they get to an old stone bridge where it says at one point the father stood watching
trout run in the river below. Now he stands there with his son as the two of them have shoes that have been worn through time and time again and are now
mostly held together by wrapping in cord. Around this time, the father begins to cough again, and this time it lets out a mist of blood. We knew the
father was dying, but now it seems it won't be long. That night as they set around the camp, the father is laying down as he watches his son throw wood on the fire. And of this, the story says,
"The boy's shadow crossed over him,
carrying an arm load of wood. He watched him stoke the flames. God's own fire drake. The sparks rushed upward and died
in the starless dark. Not all dying words are true, and this blessing is no less real for being shorn of its
ground." Again, McCarthy's way of describing the love the father has for
his son is sobering. Not all dying words are true. Sure, this world has become wicked. And those that are living are
living by terrible means. Just because humanity is dying and that's the last thing we're saying, doesn't mean that's what we've always been. Cuz here standing in front of him is his son,
God's own fire drake. And just because this blessing has been shorn from its ground, just because this boy sets in a world he doesn't belong to, he's
goodness in a world of evil. Just because this boy isn't where he's supposed to be, doesn't mean he's not real. Of course, on their track to get
into the Carolinas, they have to go over the Smokies. And as they gain elevation,
things get colder. They're now constantly freezing regardless of the time of day and have to push the cart through the snow. On top of that,
periodically, forest fires break out everywhere. may be snowing, but the world in wood is dry. They're constantly met with the options of freezing or burning to death. As they're walking,
the story muses for a bit and says this.
In his dream, she was sick and he cared for her. The dream bore the look of sacrifice, but he thought differently.
He did not take care of her, and she died alone somewhere in the dark. And there is no other dream, nor other waking world, and there is no other tale to tell.
On this road, there are no god-spoke men. They are gone, and I am left. and they have taken with them the world.
Query, how does the never to be differ from what never was?
Dark of the invisible moon, the nights now only slightly less black. By day,
vanished sun circles the earth like a grieving mother with a lamp.
People sitting on the sidewalk in the dawn, half immollet, and smoking in their clothes like failed sectarian suicides.
Others would come to help them. Within a year, there were fires on the ridges and deranged chanting, the screams of the
murdered. By day, the dead impaled on spikes along the road. What have they done? He thought that in the history of
the world, it might even be that there was more punishment than crime. But he took small comfort from it. Again, this
is the father's mindset in absence of the boy. He thinks of her. He thinks of this woman he lost. And although he dreams of some valiant sacrifice, he
says the truth is she died and he could do nothing for it. Remarking that on this road there is no God spoke man.
This line stands in contrast earlier in the book when he says his son is the word of God itself. So that divinity he imparts to the boy is absent from him.
Remarking that humanity's always been that way. How does the never to be defer from what never was? Humanity is just more of the same. Hungry, violent, and
angry. remarks on the deaths, on people burned alive, on people pinned on stakes, and gets little comfort, but some comfort from the idea that at least
those that did bad got what they deserved. There was more punishment than crime in the world. And again, from an objective sense, he may be true. We're
in the final days of the human race, and this is our swan song. And with it,
we've decided to hang people, eat people, stake people, and burn them alive. And if the story just remained there, then I think some of the
criticism that a lot of McCarthy's work gets would probably apply. If the book was just about the marauders, the blood cults, the final days of the human race,
then some of the things people say about McCarthy's writing would be true, that he's a nihilist, that he's a misenthrop.
And all of this would likely apply if it wasn't for the voice of God walks this world with him. Just when the knights are at their coldest and they don't think they can push on anymore, they
reach the summit. Now moving downhill and into the comparatively warmer lands by the fire one morning. The story says he sorted through the cans and went back
and they sat by the fire and ate the last of their crackers and a tin of sausage. In a pocket of his knapsack,
he'd found a last half packet of cocoa and he fixed it for the boy and then poured his own cup with hot water and sat blowing at the rim. You promised not
to do that, the boy said. What? You know what, Papa? He poured the hot water back into the pan and took the boy's cup and poured some of the cocoa into his own,
then handed it back.
I have to watch you all the time, the boy said. I know if you break little promises, you'll break big ones. It's what you said. I know, but I won't.
Again,
gosh, it's so good. All the moments of brooding and of truth, but of misery regarding how awful their situation is.
It's followed up by the boy making sure his dad drinks hot chocolate with him.
Likely because this is all the boy has ever known. But because it's all he's ever known, he is completely absent from the world and despair around him.
Anytime there is a statement of how awful their situation is, there is a reminder of why he persists. As they walk down the mountain side, trees begin
to fall. The boy asks if a tree is going to fall on them, and the father says it won't. The boy asks how he could know. The father says he just knows. Again,
it's almost like the father has a sense of this greater power, this greater thing around him, that for whatever reason, the world realizes the boy is
too important to take with it. One night while camping, the boy wakes up afraid.
He woke whimpering in the night, and the man held him. Shh, he said. Shh, it's okay. I had a bad dream. I know. Should I tell you what it was? If you want to.
I I had this penguin that you wound up a and it would waddle and flap its flippers and and we were in that house that we used to live in and it came
around the corner but nobody had wound it up and it was really scary.
Okay, it it was a lot scarier in the dream. I know dreams can be really scary. Why did I have that scary dream?
I don't know. But it's okay now. I'm going to put some wood on the fire. You go to sleep. The boy didn't answer. Then he said, "The winder wasn't turning."
There's something so calming that the boy's nightmares are about a toy he found. Again, an arc of goodness amidst the flood. When they get to the bottom
of the mountain, and it's a little bit warmer, they come across a waterfall. At the base of the waterfall, is a pool.
Considering it's probably been months since they've washed themselves, the father suggests they get in. It's cold, but not cold enough to freeze to death.
So, the father hops in. and the boy scared at first, but then jumps in after him. And for a little bit, the two of them are just a father and son in the mountains playing under a waterfall.
After this, it seems one of the only forms of life to have survived the apocalypse was fungus. As the father walks around the stream and shows his
son, morals, morals, also known as landfish or dry fish, or as I grew up calling them, hickory chickens, are a
type of mushroom that grows in the mountains of Appalachia that you can not only eat but are delicious. So the father shows them to his son and they pick them and that night they eat them
by the fire story remarking that as the boy watches all of this the father watches the boy at the end of the day around the fire saying this is a good
place papa in the midst of everything for a moment there are father and son having fun in the mountains they ate little mushrooms together with the beans
and drank tea and had 10 pears for their dessert he banked the fire against the seam of rock where he built it and he strung the tarp behind them to reflect
the heat and they sat warm in their refuge refuge while he told the boy stories, old stories of courage and justice as he remembered them until the
boy was asleep in his blankets. Then he stoked the fire and lay down warm and full and listened to the low thunder of the falls beyond them in the dark and thread bare wood.
Of course, when the next day comes, they have to leave. It's getting colder every day, and they need to move further south. Not to mention, if they found a
waterfall with clean water, someone else probably will, too. The boy asks if they can stay another day. father says they can't. So, they get out their map that
used to be a complete map, but now is shreds of a map. And after they piece it together, the father shows the son where they're going and what road they'll follow. The father at one point mentions
that these are state roads. And the boy asks, "What happened to the states?" And the father says, "I don't know exactly.
That's a good question." They come to a bridge over a river and there's a trailer jack knife across the road. The trailer's too low for them to push the
cart under, so they have to unload everything, slide the cart on its side, and then reload it on the other side.
That night, they slept in the cab of the abandoned truck. And the next day,
before they set out, the boy remarks that there might be something useful in the trailer. So before they leave, the father crawls on top of the trailer to have a look. There was a skylight about
a third of the way down the roof, and he made his way to it in a walking crouch.
The cover was gone, and the inside of the trailer smelled of wet plywood, and that sour smell he'd come to know.
He had a magazine in his hip pocket and he took it out and tore some pages from it and watted them, got out his lighter and lit the papers and dropped them into the darkness. A faint whooshing.
He wafted away the smoke and looked down into the trailer. A small fire burning in the floor seemed a long way down. He shielded the glare of it with his hand,
and when he did, he could see almost to the rear of the box. Human bodies sprawled in every attitude,
dried and shrunken in their rotted clothes. The small wad of burning paper drew down to a wisp of flame and then died out, leaving a faint pattern for
just a moment in the incandesence like the shape of a flower, a molten rose. Then all was dark again.
Again, here we see the aftermath of something horrific. We don't know when this trailer is from, but we can assume from the bodies that it was some point after the apocalypse. So, were these
people prisoners or slaves locked up after the truck was abandoned? Were they refugees thinking they were heading south to somewhere greater only for the
driver to be pulled out of the car and them left to their fate? We don't know,
but the story continues from here and doesn't mention them again. Another terrifying image that goes to show how the man and the boy are walking through
the ashes and final moments of what used to be. One night, it storms and the next day there's a great fire on the hillside. Seems that in the night,
lightning struck something and started another blaze. The fire is far enough away in front of them that they're safe,
but close enough that while traveling the next day, they have to stop. The road they're stepping on becomes hot soft. The fire is nearby. So, the father and son wait before they continue on.
When they continue on, they find another set of footprints in the hot pavement.
Someone who seemed to not care to walk on the melted roadway. The boy asks who it is, and the father says, "I don't know. Who is anybody?" They came upon
him, shuffling along the road before them, dragging one leg slightly and stopping from time to time to stand stooped and uncertain before setting out
again. "What should we do, Papa?" "We're all right. Let's just follow and watch."
"Take a look," the boy said. "Yes, take a look." They followed him a good ways,
but at his pace, they were losing the day, and finally, he just sat in the road and did not get up again. The boy hung on his father's coat. No one spoke.
He was as burnt looking as the country,
his clothing scorched in black. One of his eyes was burnt shut, and his hair was but a nitty wig of ash upon his blackened skull.
As they passed, he looked down as if he'd done something wrong. His shoes were bound up with wire and coated with
rotar, and he sat there in silence, bent over in his rags. The boy kept looking back. Papa, he whispered. What's wrong
with the man? He's been struck by lightning. Can't we help him, Papa? No,
we can't help him. The boy kept pulling at his coat. Papa, he said, "Stop it.
Can we help him, Papa?" "No, we can't help him. There's nothing to be done for him." They went on. The boy was crying.
He kept looking back. When they got to the bottom of the hill, the man stopped and looked at him and looked back up the road. The burned man had fallen over,
and at that distance, you couldn't even tell what it was. "I'm sorry," he said,
"but we have nothing to give him. We have no way to help him. I'm sorry for what happened to him, but we can't fix it. You know that, don't you?" The boy stood looking down. He nodded his head.
Then they went on, and he didn't look back again. For one, talk about bad luck. to have survived the apocalypse for this long and then get struck by
lightning or be stuck in a fire caused by lightning. This explains why he recklessly walked out into the road and just began to walk down it in the bride
of the day by himself. He was in his final moments, desperate for anything. Father knows his condition is helpless,
but the son can't accept that. He doesn't know who this man is. He doesn't know what awful things he's had to do to survive. All the boy sees is a man that
needs help. And all the father sees is something that could cause problems.
It's telling that the first character we come across other than the father and son is a dead man walking. Someone who
suffered a mortal injury. It's just taking a while to kick in. Similar to the world around him, he's still walking but not by much. But as with everything
else, this doesn't deter the boy as the boy simply sees someone else in the world, someone to help, someone to share experience with. This is the only world
he's ever known after all. Why would he not care for those he shares it with?
And in that moment, we're taken back to a conversation that the man had with his wife, and all of this began. We're survivors, he told her across the flame of the lamp. "Survivors," she said.
"Yes." "What in God's name are you talking about? We're not survivors.
We're the Walking Dead in a horror film." "I'm begging you. I don't care. I don't care if you cry. It doesn't mean
anything to me. Please stop it. I I'm begging you. I'll do anything." Such as what? I should have done it a long time
ago when there were three bullets in the gun instead of two. I was stupid. We've been over all this. I didn't bring
myself to this. I was brought and now I'm done. I thought about not even telling you. And that probably would have been best. You have two bullets and
then what? You can't protect us. You said you would die for us, but what good's that? I take him with me if it weren't for you. You know I would. It's
the right thing to do. You're talking crazy. No, I'm speaking the truth.
Sooner or later, they will catch us and they will kill us. They will rape me.
They'll rape him. They're going to rape us and kill us and eat us. And you won't face it. You'd rather wait for it to happen. But I can't. I can't. She sat
there smoking a slender length of dried grapevine as if it were some rare cherroot, holding it with the certain elegance, her other hand across her
knees where she'd drawn them up. She watched him across the small flame. We used to talk about death, she said.
We don't anymore. Why is that? I don't know. It's because it's here.
There's nothing left to talk about. I wouldn't leave you. I don't care. It's meaningless. You can think of me as a
faithless if you like. I've taken a new lover. You can give me what you cannot. Death is not a lover. Oh, yes he is.
Please don't do this. I'm sorry. I can't do it alone. Then don't. I can't help
you. They say that women dream of danger to those in their care and men of danger to themselves, but I don't dream at all.
You say you can't, then don't do it.
That's all. Because I'm done with my own horish heart, and I've been for a long time. You talk about taking a stand, but
there's no stand to take. My heart was ripped out of me the night he was born.
So don't ask for sorrow now. There is none. Maybe you'll be good at this. I doubt it, but who knows? The one thing I
can tell you is that you won't survive for yourself. I know because I never would have come this far. A person who had no one would be well advised to cobble together some passable ghost.
Breathe it into being and coax it along with words of love. Offer it each phantom crumb and shield it from harm
with your body. As for me, my only hope is for eternal nothingness. I hope it
with all my heart. He didn't answer. You have no argument because there is none.
Will you tell him goodbye? No, I will not. Just wait till morning. Please,
I have to go. She had already stood up.
For the love of God, woman, what am I to tell him?
I can't help you. Where are you going to go? You can't even see. I don't have to.
He stood up. I'm begging you, he said. No, I I will not. I cannot.
She was gone, and the coldness of it was her final gift. She would do it with a flake of obsidian. He taught her himself. sharper than steel, the edge
and Adam thick. And she was right. There was no argument. The hundred nights they'd set up debating the pros and cons
of self-destruction with the earnestness of philosophers chained to a mad house wall. In the morning, the boy said nothing at all. And when they were
packed and ready to set out upon the road, he turned and looked back at their campsite. And he said, "She's gone,
isn't she?" And he said, "Yes, she is.
So, we see what became of the wife. She took her own life and she couldn't take the world any longer, remarking that if she had it her way, the man and the boy
would come with her. Now, there's a lot of people who view the wife's action as
monstrous, and I get it. There's certainly an element of betrayal there,
leaving the father to take care of the son on his own. But it's also worth noting that from an objective sense,
this is truly the end of the line. There's no better world to survive for.
There is no tomorrow or safety or location they're trying to get to. It's just survival for the sake of survival.
And when you quit surviving, things get really bad. She's right. There's bands of rapists and blood cults everywhere.
She says her heart was ripped out of her the night her son was born. Likely because she realized she had brought a life into the world that would only know
suffering. And death in this world is certainly a comfort. I mean, it tempts the father every night. It says that the two of them would set up and talk about all the values of death, all the great
things that could come with it. When she decided it was the best option, he wouldn't follow. It's easy to look at her actions as cowardice, especially
with the context of the rest of the book of how long the father and son have survived, if harshly. But I more so view her decision as one made out of grief,
especially because of the line that her heart was ripped out the night her son was born. As a father, I obviously think that a father can have a pretty strong bond with their child. But it pales in
comparison to the physical connection that a mother has with her child. To grow life within you and then bring it into the world is a mighty cause. Now the mother feels like she's done that.
Cast her child into hell. While the father sees everything in his son that can be, the mother sees everything that she's done to him. Because logically her
and her child will be murdered in the worst ways you could imagine. Because of that, I view her decision to take her own life not as an act of cowardice, but
one of penance. And it's an act that of course has haunted the father ever since. We get one final mention of the beginning of the apocalypse. This
paragraph always so deliberate, hardly surprised by the most outlandish advents. Creation perfectly evolved to meet its own end. They sat at the window
and ate in their robes by candlelight midnight supper and watched distant cities burn. A few nights later she gave birth in their bed by the light of a dry cell lamp, gloves meant for dishwashing,
the improbable appearance of the small crown of the head, stre with blood and lank black hair, the rank monium. Her
cries meant nothing to him. Beyond the window, just the gathering cold, the fires on the horizon. He held aloft the
scrawny red body so raw and naked and cut the cord with kitchen shears and wrapped his son in a towel.
Did you have any friends? Yes, I did. Lots of them. Yes. Do you remember them?
Yeah, I remember them. What happened to them? They died. All of them? Yes. All of them.
Do you miss them? Yeah, I do. Where are we going? We're going south. Okay.
The child was born into this world of misery. But at that moment of his birth,
as the story said, her cries meant nothing to him. He had a new commission.
Regardless of what was to happen, he would see the child through. The mandate and word of God is mentioned earlier.
Sure, it's tragic to bring a kid into this world. A tragedy the mother never recovered from, but as the father saw it, now this kid is in the world. So,
what am I going to do about it? One night, they're sleeping by the road and are awoken to a loud noise. They look to the road and see a band of marauders walking from the direction they just
came. They're wearing a concoction of old canister masks and biohazard suits.
No guns, but instead carrying clubs and lengths of pipe. At the back of them was a large diesel truck, something rare in these parts. Quickly, the man grabs the
shopping cart and tips it over where hopefully it won't be seen. He grabs the boy who's terrified and says they have to run. As the diesel truck passes, he sees several men standing in the back,
some of them holding rifles. It's apparent that if the men are spotted,
they're dead. They crouch down out of sight and then suddenly the diesel truck dies. Any piece of technology is on its last legs. This probably happens a lot.
Now, it's happened right next to them. So, while they try to get it working,
members of the Marauders begin to fan out into the woods. After some time, the father raises his head and 20 feet away,
it's one of the marauders coming to take a leak. The two see each other and freeze and the father pulls his pistol.
He cocked the pistol and held it on the man and the man stood with one hand out at his side. The dirty crumbled paint mask that he wore, sucking in and out.
Just keep coming. He looked at the road.
Don't look back there. Look at me. If you call out, you're dead. He came forward, holding his belt by one hand.
The holes in it marked the progress of his emaciation, and the leather at one side had a lacquered look to it, where he was used stroing the blade of his
knife. He stepped down into the road cut, and he looked at the gun, and he looked at the boy, eyes collared in cups of grime and deeply sunk like an animal
inside a skull, looking out of the eyeholes. He wore a beard that had been cut square across the bottom with shears, and he had a tattoo of a bird on
his neck done by someone with an ill-formed notion of their appearance.
He was lean, wiry, kittic, dressed in a pair of filthy blue coveralls and a black bill cap with the logo of some
vanished enterprise embroidered across the front of it. Where are you going? I was going to take a crap. Where are you
going with the truck? I don't know. What do you mean you don't know? Take the mask off. Pulled the mask off over his
head and stood holding it. I mean, I don't know, he said. You don't know where you're going? No. What's the truck
running on? Diesel fuel. How much do you have? There's three 55gallon drums in the bed. Do you have ammunition for
those guns? You look back toward the road. I told you not to look back there. Yeah, we got ammunition.
Where did you get it? Found it. That's a lie. What are you eating? Whatever we can find.
[snorts] Whatever you can find.
Yeah. He looked at the boy. You won't shoot. He said, "That's what you think.
You ain't got two shells. Maybe just one. They'll hear the shot." Yeah, they will, but you won't. How you figure
that? Cuz the bullet travels faster than sound. It'll be in your brain before you can hear it. To hear it, you'll need a frontal lobe and things with names like
caliculus and temporal gyus, and you won't have them anymore. Just be soup.
You a doctor? I'm not anything. We got a man hurt and be worth your while. Do I
look like an imbecile to you? I don't know what you look like. Why are you looking at him? I can look where I want
to. No, you can't. If you look at him again, I'll shoot you. The boy was sitting with both hands on top of his head and looking out between his forearms.
I'll bet that boy's hungry. Why don't you all come on to the truck, get something to eat. Ain't no need to be such a hard ass. You don't have anything to eat. Let's go.
Go where? Let's go. I ain't going nowhere. You're not. No, I ain't.
You think I won't kill you, but you're wrong. But what I'd rather do is take you up this road a mile or so, then turn you loose. It's all the head start we
need. You won't find us. You won't even know which way we went. You know what I think? What do you think?
I think you're chicken He let go of the belt and it fell on the roadway with the gear hanging from it. A
canteen, an old canvas army pouch, a leather sheath for a knife.
When he looked up, the road rat was holding the knife in his hand. He'd only taken two steps, but he was almost between him and the child.
What do you think you're going to do with that? He didn't answer. He was a big man, but he was very quick. He dove and grabbed the boy and rolled and came
up holding him against his chest with the knife at his throat. The man had already dropped to the ground and he swung with him and leveled the pistol and fired from a two-handed position,
balanced on both knees at a distance of 6 ft. The man fell back instantly and lay with blood bubbling from the hole in his forehead. The boy was lying in his
lap with no expression on his face at all. He shoved the pistol in his belt and slung the knapsack over his shoulder and picked up the boy, turned him around
and lifted him over his head and set him on his shoulders and set off up the old roadway at a dead run, holding the boy's knees. The boy clutching his forehead,
covered with gore and mute as a stone.
As I said, anyone who's been alive this long has been alive for a reason. And a group of guys with no women or children is a bad sign. If that marauder got the two of them to step out of the woods,
they'd both be dead. And as soon as the marauder reached for the boy, the father didn't hesitate to put a bullet in his skull. Now, obviously, everyone heard that and they need to run now. He runs
for a couple miles and then they hunker down in the woods. You can hear the men looking for them, but they never get close. The book mentions that while the men are searching, they never call to
each other. It's not like there's any sympathy or loss with the one who was killed. It's like they're a pack of coyotes, each just interested in more
food or more things that could be out there. Because they had to ditch the cart, the only thing they had on them was their knapsack. Between them they had one blanket for a while they shared
it but it was getting too cold. So in the midst of the night they stumble through the woods trying to find the shopping cart. At one point the boy falls and could not be made to get up
again. So the father wraps him in the blanket and his own jacket. The story recounts that there is one round now left in the gun and says you will not
face the truth. You will not. This seems to be the father's thought towards the child if they're found again. And if something terrible is to become of them,
the father will use that last bullet to make sure his son doesn't suffer. This is what was alluded to earlier when the story said, "Could you do it?" If it
meant preventing your son from facing such a horrible fate, would you send him the same way your wife went? Final act
of love to make sure that the last bit of goodness in the world is simply taken out of it, not instead desecrated before its departure. After a day, the father finds where the marauders made camp.
Because there were so many of them, they just camped in the middle of the road.
Charred wood remains in the road next to ash and bones. Seems that nothing goes to waste out here. So when the father killed the man, that's now just another
food source for the marauders. The father wants his son to wait by the road while he goes to look for the grocery cart. The son, who hasn't spoken up until this point, begs to go with him,
but the father instead gives the son the gun. The boy doesn't want to take it,
but the father says, "I didn't ask if you wanted it. Take it." The father finds the grocery cart, but it's been ransacked. The only thing left were some books and some toys for the boy. So now,
without food or supplies beyond what's in his backpack, they take what they still have, put it in the shopping cart,
and continue down the road. As they're walking, the boy becomes tired, so the father carries him. When they get into a campsite that night, the boy doesn't want his father to leave for firewood,
but his father says he'll be close enough that he'll hear the boy if he calls. It's obvious that this situation has terrified him. The only things they
had in the father's backpack were five tins of food, binoculars, a halfpint bottle of gasoline almost full, a bottle
of water, a pair of pliers, and two spoons. Backpack hasn't bought a ton of time for the two of them to live. The boy is still covered in blood, so when
they get to a bridge with the river, the father begins to wash his hair. Water's so cold that the boy cries, but the father knows that it'd be best to take
care of this. He dried him with the blanket, kneeling there in the glow of the light with the shadow of the bridg's under structure broken across the palisade of tree trunks beyond the
creek. "This is my child," he said. "I wash a dead man's brains out of his hair. That is my job." Then he wrapped
him in the blanket and carried him to the fire. The boy sat tottering. The man watched him that he not topple in the flames. He kicked holes in the sand for
the boy's hips and shoulders where he would sleep, and he sat holding him while he tousled his hair before the fire to try it. All of this like some
ancient anointing. So be it. Evoke the forms. Where you've nothing else, construct ceremonies out of the air.
Breathe upon them. I like the weight given to it. He's just washing his son's hair. But in this world, that might as well be an anointing, a ritual. That
night as the boy sleeps the story says that the father sat beside him and stroked his pale and tangled hair golden chalice good to house of god before
saying please don't tell me how the story ends again. This boy is precious beyond what the world or the father can truly state. Eventually after this long
period of not speaking the father talks to the boy. I should have been more careful. He said the boy didn't answer.
You have to talk to me. Okay. You wanted to know what the bad guys look like. Now you know. It may happen again. My job is
to take care of you. I was appointed to do that by God. I'll kill anyone who touches you. Do you understand?
Yes. He sat there cowled in the blanket.
After a while, he looked up. Are we still the good guys? He said. Yes, we're still the good guys. And we always will be. Yeah, we always will be. Okay.
It's comforting how simple the child's outlook is. There's the good guys and they're the bad guys. And as long as they stayed the good guys, they'll be okay. But it's also true in a world full
of marauders and killers. Anything that keeps this child alive is worth keeping.
The father found a piece of reed and made a flute for the boy out of it. He gives it to the boy and at some point while they're walking down the road the next day, the boy begins to play and the
story says this. The boy took it wordlessly. After a while, he fell back,
and after a while, the man could hear him playing, formless music for the age to come, or perhaps the last music on earth called up from out of the ashes of
its ruin. The man turned and looked back at him. He was lost in concentration.
The man thought he seemed some sad and solitary changeling child announcing the arrival of a traveling spectacle in Shire and village, who does not know
that behind him the players have all been carried off by wolves. Again, the way McCarthy describes things is just
the child in the midst of this world playing the flute. As if he thinks behind him is some grand entourage or some grand purpose, but it's just because he's a boy and he enjoys playing
goodness simply for the sake of it. The two of them come to the outskirts of an old town. In the distance, they can see smoke rising. It seems that someone is
still here. Normally, this would be too risky, but they're desperate for food.
So, they start to look through the streets. The grocery stores are completely looted. The mall is completely looted, save for a couple of suit coats that they put on. They find
an old house and manage to get another sheet, but no food. As the men are leaving town, the boy says he hears something. The two of them listen, and
it seems to be a dog barking somewhere in the distance. As mentioned, animals are all but gone. Seems at first that the child didn't even know what a dog
sounds like, as his father has to tell him that that is in fact a dog they're hearing. First thing the boy does is ask if they're going to kill it. The father says no, but the boy seems terrified by
the idea that they may be so hungry that they kill a dog. To which the father bends down and tells him he promises they won't hurt it. That night, the two
of them sleep in an abandoned car underneath an overpass. Looking out at the city skyline, they can see in the upper floors of buildings the occasional
light. Seems that there are groups of peoples living in the ruins of this city. Doesn't know what they're eating or how they manage to carry water up,
but somehow people live here. And then in the night, the story says this. He woke in the night and laid listening. He couldn't remember where he was. The thought made him smile. "Where are we?"
he said. "What is it, Papa?" "Nothing.
We're okay. Go to sleep." "We're going to be okay, aren't we, Papa?" "Yes, we are. Nothing bad is going to happen to
us." That's right. Because we're carrying the fire. Yes, because we're carrying the fire. This motif will continue through the rest of the story.
The idea that the two of them are carrying the fire, it's such a succinct way to describe all of the weight that's being attributed to these two thus far.
The idea that the gods are watching,
that the father carries some message from God himself to take care of the boy. All that can simply be described that the two of them are carrying the
fire. Fire that's needed in a world so dark and so cold. Eventually, they find something close to food. Old cornmeal.
Rats have gotten into it, but he sifts out the rat turds and begins to make cakes out of the meal. Far from filling,
but it'll keep them alive. While sitting on the porch of the house, they found the cornmeal in this happens. The boy was sitting on the steps when he saw something move at the rear of the house
across the road. A face was looking at him. A boy about his age, wrapped in an outsized wool coat with the sleeves
turned back. He stood up. He ran across the road and up the drive. No one there.
He looked toward the house and then he ran to the bottom of the yard through the dead weeds to a still black creek.
"Come back," he called. "I won't hurt you." He was standing there crying when his father came sprinting across the road and seized him by the arm. "What
are you doing?" he hissed. "What are you doing?" "There's a little boy, Papa.
There's a little boy." "There's no little boy? What are you doing?" "Yes,
there is. I saw him. I told you stay put. Didn't I tell you? Now we've got to go. Come on. I just wanted to see him,
Papa. I just wanted to see him. The man took him by the arm and they went back up through the yard. The boy would not stop crying and he would not stop looking back. Come on, the man said.
We've got to go. I want to see him,
Papa. There's no one to see. Do you want to die? Is that what you want? I don't care, the boy said, sobbing. I don't
care. The man stopped. He stopped and squatted and held him. I'm sorry, he
said. Don't say that. You mustn't say that.
As they make their way out of town, the boy begins to speak again. What if the little boy doesn't have anybody to take care of him? He said, "What if he
doesn't have a papa?" "There are people there. They were just hiding." He pushed the cart out into the road and stood there.
He could see the tracks of the truck through the wet ash, faint and washed out. But there, he thought that he could smell them. The boy was pulling out his coat.
Papa, he said. Yes. I'm afraid for that little boy. I know, but he'll be all right. We should go get him, Papa. We
could get him and take him with us. We could take him and we could take the dog. The dog could catch something to eat. We can't. And I'd give that little boy half of my food. Stop it. We can't.
He was crying again. What about the little boy? He sobbed. What about the little boy?
It's never clearly stated and it's debated if the boy was even real. I mean, this world seems to play tricks on you and it certainly plays tricks on the
father. Maybe the boy just saw what he wanted to see, another boy his age, someone he could share this world with.
But the father knows that if there is a little boy there, uh, whoever is with the little boy probably doesn't want a random man and his child coming in on
them, especially when resources are so scarce. But of course, this breaks the boy's heart. a boy who thinks of having a friend and having a dog and maybe the
world can be made okay. This won't be the last time the story mentions the child, but it's honestly up to you if you think he's real or not. We then get another passage where the story switches
again to the first person. The dog that he remembers followed us for two days. I tried to coax it to come, but it would not. I made a noose of wire to catch it.
There were three cartridges in the pistol. None to spare. She walked away down the road. The boy looked after her and then he looked at me and then he
looked at the dog and he began to cry and to beg for the dog's life and I promised I would not hurt the dog.
Trellus of a dog with the hide stretched over it. The next day it was gone. That is the dog he remembers. He doesn't remember any little boys.
This seems to be another memory. A time in the past in the first days of this where they saw another dog. We know this because this is when they had three
rounds in the gun. The boy wanted to catch the dog and the father wanted to catch the dog for the boy, but the wife at this point, seemingly done with the
world, didn't care. She continued down the road. The story says it was the trellis of a dog with the hide stretched over it. In other words, the dog was
nothing but bones, emaciated and near death. It says the next day the dog was gone. Now, this could mean the dog ran away or more likely the dog died. Or
considering this is back when they had three cartridges in the gun and that was just stated, maybe the father used one of the cartridges to put the dog out of
its misery. If this was in the early days of the apocalypse, perhaps that seemed like being worth a bullet at the time. When it says that is the dog he remembers, he doesn't remember any
little boys. Perhaps it's saying the father remembers this dog and that's the dog that came to mind, but the father didn't see a little boy in the window of
the house. Further insisting that perhaps there wasn't a little boy there.
They continued down the road, stopping to look at old, mostly burnout houses on their way. At one point, they come to a stone wall, and at the stone wall are
several human heads. The wall beyond held a freeze of human heads, all faced alike, dried and caved with their taut grins and shrunken eyes. They wore gold
rings and their leather ears, and in the wind their sparse and ratty hair twisted about on their skulls. The teeth in their sockets like dental molds, the
groove tattoos etched in some homebrewed wo faded in the beggar sunlight. spiders, swords, targets, a dragon,
runic slogans, creeds misspelled, old scars with old motifs stitched along their borders. The heads not trenched,
shapeless, had been flayed of their skins, and the raw skulls painted and signed across the forehead in a scrawl,
and one white bone skull had the plate sutures etched carefully in ink like a blueprint for assembly. He looked back at the boy, standing by the card in the
wind. These must be the remnants of the blood cults mentioned earlier. people who develop their own creeds or religion or suffering in this state of the world.
And these are their aftermarks. Heads placed on pikes and on walls for some reason, drawn and covered in symbols that he doesn't quite understand. The
next morning, they look at the road and see the people who may be responsible for this. A group is coming. Four marchers stand at the front. All members
of the party wear red cloth around their necks. An army in tennis shoes tramping,
carrying three-foot lengths of pipe with leather wrappings, lanyards at the wrist. Some of the pipes were threaded through with links of chain fitted at
their ends with every manner of bludgeon. They clinkedked past, marching with a swaying gate like windup toys,
bearded, their breath smoking through their masks. Shh, he said. Shh.
The failings following carried spears or lances tassled with ribbons, the long blades hammered out of truck springs at
some crude forge up country. The boy lay with his face in his arms, terrified.
They passed 200 feet away, the ground shuddering lightly, tramping. Behind them came wagons drawn by slaves and
harness and piled with goods of war, and after that the women, perhaps a dozen in number, some of them pregnant, and
lastly a supplementary consort of catamites, ill-clod against the cold,
and fitted in dog collars, and yolked each to each, all passed on. They lay listening.
Are they gone, Papa? Yes, they're gone. Did you see them?
Yes. Were they the bad guys? Yes, they were the bad guys. There's a lot of them, those bad guys. Yes, there are.
But they're gone. They stood and brushed themselves off, listening to the silence in the distance. Where are they going,
Papa? I don't know. They're on the move.
It's not a good sign. Why isn't it a good sign? It just isn't. We need to get the map and take a look. As mentioned,
those that have lived have done so through horrible means. They look like some ancient forgotten tribe using spears and clubs. They have slaves that
pull their wagons, and they have women and men that they use for sexual pleasure. Since some of the women are pregnant, perhaps that's a consequence.
Or perhaps that's just a symptom of their enslavement. Katamites are men,
most often young boys, used as sexual slaves. Seems anyone they find on the road is put to use somewhere, either pulling the cart or as one of the
trophies of war. There's a reason that the boy's mother took herself out of the picture and a reason the father keeps the last bullet for the boy. The snow
begins to fall and it gets intense. The two of them, huddled underneath the tarp, try to push the cart through the snow. The boy is tired, but the man says they have to keep going. At one point,
the boy says, "If we were going to die,
would you tell me?" man says, "I don't know, but we're not going to die." In the midst of the misery, when they start to make a fire, there is a kind of funny interaction. When he struck the lighter
to the rich tender, the fire crackled instantly, and he knew that it would not last long. He looked at the boy. "I've got to go for more wood," he said. "I'll
be in the neighborhood." "Okay, where's the neighborhood?" "It just means I won't be far." "Okay,
again, things we take for granted, but to the boy are completely alien." When they wake, they have to push the heavy snow off of the tarp they're under. It's
getting harder and harder for the man to convince the boy to keep going. At this point, the snow is up to their knees,
and it's clear they're not going to push the shopping cart through this. So, they take the last few things that they're not going to be able to carry, things like an extra coat, and they cut it up
and use it as more wrapping for their feet. After the father wraps the boy's foot, the boy then says it's now his turn. Again, looking out for his father.
But with the snow coming down, they leave the cart there in the woods on the side of the road. I mean, it's not like there's a lot of food or supplies in it in the first place. It's so hardgoing,
it takes them an hour to just go a mile.
At one point, the dad turns around and sees the boy just standing there. Calls out to the boy and says, "You think we're going to die, don't you?" The boy says he thinks they're going to die
without anything to eat. The father says they have water, so it's a long way to go before that happens. The father asks the boy if the boy thinks the father
lies. Boy says no, but that he might lie about them dying. To which the father replies, "Okay, I might, but we're not dying." That night they build a fire and camp nearly in the middle of the road.
The next day when they wake up in the road there are tire tracks. Tracks that seem to have been from a wagon. And the footsteps in the middle seem to imply a
man pushed wagon. That means in the middle of the night while they had a large fire roaring not 50 ft away,
someone walked by and didn't even look over. Father figures this probably isn't a good sign and they need to get out of there. To cover their tracks, the two of
them walk in circles around the campfire in order to confuse anyone who may be looking for them. The father figures if one person saw them the night before,
then he may come back with more. Then they go into the woods to watch the road. Sure enough, two men come down the road seemingly looking for them or
perhaps just smelling the smoke from last night. They continue on and come across an old grand house, one that surprisingly hasn't been burned down.
The father says they need to go up there, but once again, the boy is afraid to enter. father remarking that they have to have a look. They've barely eaten in the last five days. The house
is old and dusty, but surprisingly together. It has a large porch, large windows. One of the windows is slightly open and a cord runs out of it into the
yard. And as they look through the windows, the boy again begs to leave.
Once again, the father says they have no choice. There are certainly signs of the apocalypse here. All of the grand cabinets and tables have had the wood ripped off of them that could be burned,
but the structures themselves are still there. While looking at the otherwise empty house, the story says, "Piled in a wind row in one corner of the room was a
great heap of clothing, clothes and shoes, belts, coats, blankets, and old sleeping bags. He would have ample time
later to think about that." Aside from that menacing comment at the end, this seems like a jackpot. All kinds of clothes and supplies that people could
use. Around the kitchen, there seems to be blackened pots. These pots, unlike everything else, aren't covered in ash.
They seem to be used for something. The cord they saw earlier that went out the window into the yard is tied in here to a large brass bell. Eventually, they
make their way into the pantry. In the floor of this room was a door or hatch,
and it was locked with a large padlock made of stack steel plates. He stood looking at it. "Papa," the boy said. "We should go, Papa. There's a reason this is locked." The boy pulled at his hand.
He was almost in tears. "Papa," he said. "We've got to eat." "I'm not hungry, Papa. I'm not.
[snorts]
We need to find a pry bar or something. They pushed out through the back door,
the boy hanging on to him. He shoved the pistol in his belt and stood looking out over the yard. There was a brick walkway and the twisted and wiry shape of what
once had been a row of boxwoods. In the yard was an old iron harrow propped up on peers of stacked brick, and someone had wedged between the rails of it a
40-gallon cast iron cauldron, the kind once used for rendering hogs. Underneath were the ashes of a fire and blackened
billets of wood. Off to one side, a small wagon with rubber tires. All these things he saw and did not see. The far
side of the yard was an old wooden smokehouse and a tool shed. He crossed,
half-dragging the child, went sorting through the tools, standing in a barrel under the shed roof. He came up with a long-handled spade and hefted it in his hand. "Come on," he said.
There's a wagon with rubber tires, the same thing he saw in tracks in the snow.
And in combination with the blacken pots he saw inside, outside, there's a large cauldron with the remnants of a fire beneath it. These are things that should
be alarming to him. But he's so hungry that, as the story said, all these things he saw but did not see. Dad goes back inside and uses the tool to break
open the hatch. The boy's terrified, but does not want to be left at the top of the stairs alone. So, he begins to descend down the staircase with his dad.
He started down the rough wooden steps.
He ducked his head and then flicked the lighter and swung the flame out over the darkness like an offering. Coldness and damp, an ungodly stench. The boy
clutched at his coat. He could see part of a stone wall, clay floor, an old mattress darkly stained. He crouched and
stepped down again and held out the light.
Huddled against the back wall were naked people, male and female, all trying to hide, shielding their faces with their
hands. On the mattress lay a man with his legs gone to the hip and the stumps of them blackened and burnt. The smell was hideous.
"God," he whispered. Then one by one they turned and blinked in the pitiful light. "Help us," they whispered.
"Please help us," he said. Oh,
he turned and grabbed the boy. Hurry, he said. Hurry. He dropped the lighter. No time to look. He pushed the boy up the
stairs. Help us, they called. Hurry. A bearded face appeared blinking at the foot of the stairs. Please, he called.
Please, hurry, for God's sake. Hurry. He shoved the boy through the hatch and sent him sprawling. He stood and got hold of the door and swung it over and
let it slam down. and he turned to grab the boy. But the boy had gotten up and was doing his little dance of terror. "For the love of God, will you come on?"
he hissed. But the boy was pointing out the window, and when he looked, he went cold all over. Coming across the field toward the house were four bearded men
and two women. He grabbed the boy by the hand. He said, "Run, run." The two of them bolt out of the house and run to
the treeine. He doesn't know if the group saw him, but if they did, they could be on top of them at any moment.
As they crash into the wood and the father grabs the son, the story says,
"This is the moment. This is the moment." Spite be the moment where he has to make sure his son doesn't suffer such a terrible fate. They crawled
slowly through the leaves towards what looked like lower ground. He lay listening, holding the boy. He could hear them in the road talking. Voice of
a woman. Then he heard them in the dry leaves. He took the boy's hand and pushed the revolver into it. "Take it,"
he whispered. "Take it!" The boy was terrified. put his arm around him and held him, his body so thin. "Don't be afraid," he said. "If they find you,
you're going to have to do it. Do you understand?" "Shh, no crying. Do you hear me? You know how to do it." You put
it in your mouth and point it up. Do it quick and hard. Do you understand? Stop crying. Do you understand? I think so.
No. Do you understand? Yes. Say, "Yes, I do, Papa. Yes, I do,
Papa. He looked down at him. All he saw was terror. He took the gun from him.
No, you don't, he said. I don't know what to do, Papa. I don't know what to do. Where will you be? It's okay. I
don't know what to do. Shh. I'm I'm right here. I won't leave you. Promise.
Yes, I promise. I was going to run to try and lead them away, but I can't leave you, Papa. Shh. Stay down. I'm so scared. Sh.
They lay listening. Can you do it? When the time comes. When the time comes, there will be no time. Now is the time.
Curse God and die. What if it doesn't fire? It has to fire. What if it doesn't fire? Could you crush that beloved skull
with a rock? Is there such a being within you of which you know nothing?
Can there be? Hold them in your arms just so. soul is quick. Pull him toward you. Kiss him quickly.
What a terrifying thing for a father to have to teach their child. How to kill themsel if the need arises. And as the story almost interrogates the father,
could you do it if the gun didn't work?
Could you do it with a rock? Could you do anything to make sure he didn't suffer the fate you saw in the basement?
Seems that what the two came across was a cannibal farm. People captured from the side of the road, hence the pile of old sleeping bags, blankets, and
clothes. and then thrown into the cellar where their limbs are cut piece by piece. All of that cooked in the hog cauldron mentioned outside. And it seems
that it was one of these people that passed them on the side of the road.
Although, since there was only one set of footprints in the wagon, they were probably by themsel. When they got back to the house, they told the others, and
that's the two men who the father saw walking down the road after they hid in the woods. Everything they've seen is the depths of evil with little reprieve.
They lay there in the ditch, and eventually the footsteps cease. Of course, the father isn't going to take any chances, so they stay there into the night. It's terribly cold, but the
father has a blanket in his knapsack that he puts over the boy, and eventually the boy falls asleep. Through the night, the father hears terrible screaming coming from the house, and he
begins to think on the things he saw. On their way up to the house, they saw a large box that looked kind of like a child's play place. The father realizes
that this is likely a point for a lookout. One of the cannibals sets in the box and has the wire to the bell ran all the way down to the box. They see
anyone coming from the road, they simply pull the string, alerting everyone into the house, and then they descend on whoever the traveler might be. It's unlikely this group of six could deal
with groups like the Marauders, but a father and son are easy prey. He wakes the boy and they begin walking through the night. Boy is too tired to carry on,
so the father carries him as he sleeps on his shoulder. The next morning, he lays the boy down to rest and sees an old barn and house in the distance. In the barn, he finds a couple old hay
bells, and inside of the hay bells are some old seeds of something. So in desperation, the father tries to eat them and gather the rest for his son. In
the house, the only thing he finds is a grape flavored drink mix. Not a lot of nutritional value, but something the boy would enjoy. In the garage, he finds a
box cutter with some blades. Useful, but not something they can eat. So after all of this, he begins to make his way back to where he left his son. And the story
says this. He walked out and stood looking across the fields towards the pinewood where the boy lay sleeping. He walked up through the orchard, and then
he stopped again. He'd stepped on something. He took a step back and knelt and parted the grass with his hands. It
was an apple. He picked it up and held it to the light. Hard and brown and shriveled. He wiped it with the cloth and bit into it. Dry and almost tasteless, but an apple. Ate it entire,
seeds and all. He held the stem between his thumb and forefinger and let it drop. He went treading softly through the grass. His feet were still wrapped
in the remnants of the coat and the shreds of tarp. and he sat and untied them and stuffed the wrappings in his pocket, went down the rows barefoot. By the time he got to the bottom of the
orchard, he had four more apples and he put them in his pocket and came back.
He went rowby row till he trod a puzzle in the grass and more apples than he could carry. Felt out the spaces about the trunks and filled his pockets full.
And he piled apples in the hood of his parka behind his head, carried apples stacked along his forearm against his chest.
The remnants of plant life buried beneath an old orchard. Again, right when things are at their worst, right when the two of them are likely to starve to death, apples, an extinct
fruit, finds itself in the ground. On top of that, the garden had a sister.
So, he uses mason jars from the house to fill up clean drinking water. So, when he gets back and wakes the boy up, they eat apples, have clean water, and even
get a little bit of grape drink. The boy remarking, "You did good, Papa." But no good moment goes unpunished because immediately after this, as they're
walking down the road, it begins to rain. The two become dangerously cold and the story said it was as long a night as he could remember out of a great plenty of such nights. Boy can't
continue any further and they're forced to lay on the wet ground underneath a pile of old blankets, coats, and a tarp.
They dry out their clothes the next morning and the boy asks for a fire to which the father tells the boy he dropped the lighter in the cannibal
basement. If the father finds some flint, he can use the gasoline they have to start a fire, but the lighter is a lifesaver in this world. Now it's gone.
The two have yet to talk about what they encountered until finally the son speaks. The boy lay with his head in the man's lap. After a while, he said,
"They're going to kill those people,
aren't they?" Yes. Why do they have to do that?
I don't know. Are they going to eat them? I don't know. They're going to eat them, aren't they? Yes. And we couldn't help them because then they'd eat us,
too? Yes. And that's why we couldn't help them. Yes. Okay.
Again, even in the midst of everything,
the thought at the front of the boy's mind is helping people. He saw people in these dire conditions, and he's sad that they weren't able to get them out of there. I mean, there's nothing the
father and son could have done. He only has one bullet, and there were six of them. But regardless, what weighs on the boy's mind is how now the world's just a
little bit worse. As they continue down the road, they speak again. What is it?
The man said. Nothing. We'll find something to eat. We always do. The boy didn't answer. The man watched him.
That's not it, is it? It's okay. Tell me. The boy looked away down the road.
Hey, I want you to tell me it's okay. He shook his head. Look at me, the man said. He turned and looked. He looked
like he'd been crying. Just tell me. We wouldn't ever eat anybody, would we?
No, of course not. Even if we were starving, we're starving now. You said we weren't. I said we weren't dying. I didn't say we weren't starving.
But we wouldn't. No, we wouldn't. No matter what. No matter what.
Because we're the good guys. Yes. And we're carrying the fire. And we're carrying the fire. Yes.
Okay.
Sometimes the dialogue from the boy sounds like an angel stepping through a battlefield. At first, his concern was the people they couldn't save, and now
it's the concern that him and his father would ever stoop to such lows. Keep in mind, this boy has seen more death and destruction and bodies and carnage than
most people ever have. But his concern is that they'll do something that puts out their fire. It's interesting when you read the road for the first time
because in the first several pages, you feel for the father. Sure, you see the way the father speaks of the son. You understand the importance and you get
why the father pushes as hard as he does to live. But then as you see the depravity of this world and you hear about the catamites and the cannibals
and the marauders and you see the way this boy reacts to everything so positively, it doesn't just become the father's motivation for the child to
live. becomes our motivation for the child to live. The boy is in such stark contrast to the world around him, how could we not need him to succeed. What
at first was the father's importance becomes our importance. And McCarthy does a good job at getting all of this across in such an understated way. It's not uncommon, especially in
post-apocalyptic stories, for child characters to just come off as annoying.
They're always questioning what has to be done or they're always afraid or they're preachy. And a lot of the times we brush that aside because either they're a kid or similar to this story,
they're the last hope for humanity. But I think a lot of it is because of the brevity of the child's statements. The child never goes on these tangents about
how they need to continue, how they need to push forward, and the child's lines never come off as unrealistic or contrived. The child just asks questions to his father that his father answers
honestly. Every now and then, the child adds something like, "We're carrying the fire." It's a testament to the writing that we see the importance that McCarthy
wants us to see. We understand that the boy must live and we understand that the fire is important because what else is there? The days continue to pass and
they don't get any better. They're still starving. The nights are cold. The boy is emaciated near to nothing. It says between his near translucent skin and large eyes, he has the look of an alien.
They're in such dire straits that the story says he was beginning to think that death was finally upon them, that they should find someplace to hide where
they would not be found. There were times when he sat watching the boys sleep, that he would begin to sob uncontrollably, but it wasn't about death. He wasn't sure what it was about,
but he thought it was about beauty or about goodness.
Things that he no longer any way to think about at all. They squatted in a bleak wood and drank ditch water strained through a rag. He'd seen the
boy in a dream laid out upon a cooling board and woke in horror. What he could bear in the waking world he could not by night and he set awake for fear the
dream would return. The book goes on to describe the horror of their situation and says borrowed time and borrowed world and borrowed eyes with which to
sorrow it. It seems like this is the end of the line. The father said that a man in peril should dream of peril and now he has dreams of his son lying dead.
Some ways perhaps that would be better for the father. Perhaps that would ease his suffering. But then the final light of this world would at last be extinguished. Outside of a small town,
they set in a truck to rest. There's a sign at the front of the town that warns of death. We're not told explicitly what the sign says, but we can imagine it's
some group saying, you know, if you show up in town, we'll kill you or eat you or whatever. The father asks the son if he can read it, and the boy says yes. The
father tells the boy not to pay any attention to it, and that everyone here is probably dead before the boy remarks, "I wish that little boy was with us."
The boy is still thinking about how he might have had a friend or save someone who needed their help. Earlier the story mentioned that at the point of death he
would dream of what used to be. It seems that death is calling to him as a paragraph reads rich dreams now which he was loathed to wait from things no
longer known in the world. The cold drove him forth to mend the fire. Memory of her crossing the lawn toward the house in the early morning in a thin
rose gown that clung to her breasts. You thought each memory recalled must do some violence to its origins. As in a party game, say the word and pass it on.
So be sparing. What you alter in the remembering has yet a reality known or not.
For one, the final line is an excellent notion that as we misremember things, we create a new reality out of them. But also the idea that these memories of his
wife, these memories of her in a sundress, they're too beautiful to remember because every time he remembers, it fades a little bit away. doesn't do justice to the original.
Siren Song of Death continues to speak to him. The father has become so delusional and paranoid that at one point they're walking through an empty house and pass a mirror and the father
aims a gun at the mirror thinking they've come across two strangers. They continue to check out this house that's in the middle of a field and has a few satellite buildings, things like a
garden shed and a tool shed. In the garden shed, there are old packets of seeds and for some reason he puts them in his pocket. They'll never grow again,
but it's nice to think they might. He finds some old gasoline, some motor oil,
more supplies, but not a lot that'll keep him alive. Until while walking across the yard, the story says this.
Crossing the grass, he felt half faint and he had to stop. He wondered if it was from smelling the gasoline. The boy was watching him. How many days to death? 10? Not so many more than that.
He couldn't think. Why had he stopped? He turned and looked down at the grass.
He walked back, testing the ground with his feet. He stopped and turned again.
Then he went back to the shed. He returned with a garden spade, and in the place where he'd stood, he chucked the blade into the ground. It sank to half
its length and stopped with a hollow wooden sound. He began to shovel away the dirt. Walking across the yard, he
felt a depression, and sure enough, it was soft dirt on top of it with a wooden slat. He uncovers the wood and sees that
it's another trap door. similar to the one in the cannibal house. It has a padlock at one end. He goes to open it and the boy begs him not to. Of course,
remembering what happened the last time they opened a padlock. However, this time the elements aren't as strange.
There's no pile of clothes. There's no blackened pots. It seems that whatever was here has truly been forgotten about.
So, the father just reassures his son that it's okay and keeps going. But then the boy breaks. He had his fist clutched at his chest and he was bobbing up and
down with fear. The man dropped the shovel and put his arms around him. Come on, he said. Let's just go sit on the porch and rest a while. Then we can go.
Let's just sit for a while. Okay. They sat wrapped in the blankets and looked out at the yard. They sat for a long time. He tried to explain to the boy
that there was no one buried in the yard, but the boy just started crying.
After a while, he even thought that maybe the child was right. "Let's just sit," he said. "We won't even talk." "Okay."
While looking at the boy's face, the man thinks that he feared something was gone that could not be put right again. It's hard to say the boy has innocence given the world he's grown up in. But what
little he might have had seems to have been tarnished away. For the boy,
there's fear around every corner. Every door holds a monster. They make a makeshift lantern out of an old glass bottle and the gasoline he found. Then
the father speaks to his son. He rose and took the pistol from his belt. "This door looks like the other door," he said, "but it's not. I know you're
scared. That's okay. I think there may be things in there and we have to take a look. There's no place else to go. This
is it. I want you to help me. If you don't want to hold the lamp, you'll have to take the pistol.
I'll hold the lamp. Okay. This is what the good guys do. They keep trying. They don't give up. Okay.
So, they go back to the door, break open the lock, and descend down the stairs.
The bunker was walled with concrete block. A poured concrete floor laid over with kitchen tile. There was a couple of iron cotss with bare springs, one
against either wall. The mattress pads rolled up at the foot of them in army fashion. He turned and looked at the boy crouched above him, blinking in the
smoke, rising up from the lamp. And then he descended to the lower steps and sat and held the lamp out. "Oh my god," he whispered. "Oh my god,
what is it, Papa? Come down. Oh. Oh my god. Come down. Crate upon crate of canned goods.
Tomatoes, peaches, beans, apricots,
canned hams, corn beef, hundreds of gallons of water in 10gon plastic jerry jugs, paper towels, toilet paper, paper
plates, plastic trash bags stuffed with blankets. He held his forehead in his hand. "Oh my god," he said. He looked
back at the boy. "It's all right," he said. "Come down,
Papa. Come down. Come down and see. He stood the lamp on the step and went up and took the boy by the hand. Come on,
he said. It's all right. What did you find? I found everything.
Everything. Wait till you see. He led him down the stairs and picked up the bottle and held the flame aloft. Can you see? He said. Can you see?
What is all this stuff, Papa? It's food. Can you read it?
Pears. That says pears. Yes. Yes, it does. Oh, yes it does.
By a miracle, they have stumbled across a bunker of food. Food put together by some prepper who never got the chance to use it. In a moment where the father
thought him and the boy were about to lose everything, they found everything.
The chances of this happening are supernatural. I mean, he just walks across a spot in the yard and finds an entire underground bunker. Seems like a
complete deosex machina. That is of course when you extract the story from some of the things we've seen in the subtext. As the father said, they
seemingly always find food right at the last minute. Every time something terrible happens, something makes it right. It's not a matter of chance or
luck, but simply that for some reason the world has curated them in this way.
That any atrocity be paid with goodness or vice versa. In a moment where everything was wrong, suddenly things
might be okay. The boy, as innocent as ever, asks if it's okay for them to take all of this. The father says it's okay that the people who stalked all of this
would want them to have it because they were the good guys just like them. So childishly in a question the boy hasn't heard for some time, dad says, "What
would you like for supper?" The boy says, "Pears so they have a meal of pears, peaches." While the boy sleeps on rollup bedding on a spring bed, a luxury
he's probably not used to. The father begins to take inventory of everything they have. In addition to food, there's clothes, sweaters, socks, soap,
toothpaste, toothbrushes. Amusingly,
several gold kruger ends. Something that mattered before the world fell apart, but now it's little more than weight. Boxes of 45 ACP and 3030 rifle rounds,
but no guns to match. The story remarks that the father was ready to die, and now he wasn't. And he had to think on that. They were going to be in this
bunker for some time, and the hatch was completely exposed now to anyone passing by. So, that would need to be dealt with. While sitting in the bunker, the
story says what woke the boy was him grinding coffee in a small hand grinder. He sat up and stared all around. "Papa,"
he said. "Hi, are you hungry?" "I have to go to the bathroom. I have to pee."
He pointed with the spatula toward the low steel door. He didn't know how to use the toilet, but they would use it anyway. They weren't going to be here that long, and he wasn't going to be
opening and closing the hatch anymore than they had to. The boy went past, his hair matted with sweat. "What is that?"
he said. "Coffee, ham, biscuits." "Wow,"
the boy said. Again, it's cool all the things McCarthy gets a lot with such basic lines of dialogue. The boy woke up
sweating. That means it was hot enough in the bunker that he had the privilege to sweat. Something in such stark contrast from the constantly freezing at
shivering nights he's used to. Boy's never used a toilet before. He's not sure how one works, but he'll use it anyway. And then the visual of the
father grinding coffee and then pointing with his spatula like a stay-at-home dad. And the boy has almost certainly never seen coffee, ham, and biscuits all
at once. Every time I get to this part in the book, I just want to stay here.
The road's been heavy. It's burned both of these people down, and now they get to breathe. They sat down to eat, and the dad shows the son how to put butter
on biscuits. Then this touching moment takes place. Are you all right? I don't know. Do you feel okay? Yes. What is it?
Do you think we should thank the people?
the people. The people who gave us all this. Well, yes, I guess we could do that.
Will you do it? Why don't you? I don't know how. Yes, you do. You know how to
say thank you. The boy sat staring at his plate. He seemed lost. The man was about to speak when he said, "Dear
people, thank you for all this food and stuff. We know that you saved it for yourself and if you were here, we wouldn't eat it no matter how hungry we
were. And we're sorry that you didn't get to eat it and we hope that you're safe in heaven with God. He looked up.
Is that okay? He said, "Yes, I think that's okay."
I mean, come on, man. [laughter] How does this break your heart? I mean,
in a lesser story, it would be like the kid's ignorant. Like, he's oblivious to the world around him. But we know that can't be because of how much the kid's seen. He's been there for the worst of
it. Like I said, the father's mission becomes ours the more the story goes on,
and it's because of the goodness the child has in him. They use a burner and water, and for one of the few times in the boy's life, gets to have a hot bath.
The father gets an old mattress from the house and lays it over the door. I mean,
obviously, a mattress in the middle of a field is kind of conspicuous, but at least it's not, you know, a giant door.
He also remembered what happened with the marauder he shot earlier. The marauder looked at the cylinder of his revolver and saw that he only had two
bullets. So, the man whittleles wood to make five fake bullets that he stains with soot and then places them in the five empty slots in the cylinder so that
if the situation arose again, someone may think he had a full count. That night, the two sit across from each other and play checkers. The boy asks
how long they can stay, and the dad says, "Not long. Probably just another day or two." The next day, they search the nearby town and in the old market they find another shopping cart. So,
they bring it back to the bunker,
preparing to load it with supplies before they set out on the road. We could take two of them, the boy said.
No, I I could push one. You're the scout. I need you to be our lookout.
What are we going to do with all the stuff? We'll just have to take what we can. Do you think somebody is coming?
Yes, sometime. You said nobody was coming. I didn't mean ever. I wish we could live here. I know. We could be on
the lookout. We are on the lookout. What if some good guys came? Well, I don't think we're likely to meet any good guys on the road. We're on the road. I know.
If you're on the lookout all the time,
does that mean that you're scared all the time? Well, I suppose you have to be scared enough to be on the lookout in the first place to be cautious,
watchful. But the rest of the time, you're not scared. The rest of the time.
Yeah. I don't know. Maybe you should always be on the lookout. If trouble comes when you least expect it, then maybe the thing to do is to always expect it. Do you always expect it,
Papa? I do, but sometimes I might forget to be on the lookout. It's probably easy to put yourself in their shoes and ask,
"Why don't they just stay there?" Like,
sure, the bunker won't last forever, but it'll last for several months, right?
Well, there's a few reasons for it. For one, the whole reason they're heading south in the first place is because it's getting colder and they're just approaching the winter months. So,
unless they can stay out there for the entire winter, the later they leave, the harder the travel will be. Also, the entrance to the bunker is now exposed.
And sure, they have a mattress over top of it, which may look normal from a distance, but on closer inspection,
someone's going to find them. Keep in mind, this isn't far from where the cannibal house was. There's people around looking for things to eat. So, even if they could brave the winter,
there's going to be other desperate people nearby. Also, there's, of course,
the underlying timer at the back of all of this that the boy probably isn't aware of. Dad's dying. We don't know how much longer he has, but if he's coughing up blood, it's probably not a ton. So,
what happens if the father dies while they're still in the bunker? Sure, he may be comfortable for his final moments, but then his son would have nothing. He'd eat through the food, and
then he'd be stuck in the cold. So even if the son doesn't want it to happen, for his sake, they have to keep pushing.
Father cuts his son's hair. After his son takes a look in the mirror, he says that he looks really skinny, to which the dad remarks, "You are really skinny." The dad shaves his beard, which I'm sure was long and ratty at the time,
and the first thing the son says is,
"Won't you be cold?" That night, it begins to rain. The father makes sure the bunker is sealed, and then he sees that his son is sweating. Pulls back his blanket, turns down the heater, and then
lays into bed himself. The story says this. When he woke again, he thought the rain had stopped. That wasn't what woke him. He'd been visited in a dream by
creatures of a kind he'd never seen before. They did not speak. He thought that they'd been crouching by the side of his cot as he slept and then had
skulked away on his awakening. He turned and looked at the boy. Maybe he understood for the first time that to
the boy he was himself an alien, a being from a planet that no longer existed,
the tales of which were suspect. He could not construct for the child's pleasure the world he'd lost without constructing the loss as well. He
thought perhaps the child had known this better than he. He tried to remember the dream, but he could not. All that was left was the feeling of it. He thought perhaps they'd come to warn him of what?
that he could not enkindle in the heart of the child what was ashes in his own.
Even now, some part of him wished they never found this refuge. Some part of him always wished it to be over. The father is beginning to realize the
things that we've talked about. That to the boy, things like houses, businesses,
society seem like ghosts. And anytime the father tells his stories, perhaps they're delightful for the moment, but it's just reminding the son of things
that used to be. It's impossible to have the story without the loss. As the book says, dead almost thinking that aside from starving to death or perhaps
including starving to death, it may have been better if they never found this place because it's just another thing to compare the misery to that awaits them.
In the morning, they prepared for their voyage the next day. They put the grocery cart in one of the sheds and began to load it up, packing it to the
brim with water, food, gas. So, the next day, with fresh food, fresh clothes, and fresh masks, they set out again on the
road. The cart was too heavy to push into the wet woods, and they nooned in the middle of the road and fixed hot tea and ate the last of the canned ham with crackers and with mustard and
applesauce, sitting back to back and watching the road. "Do you know where we are, Papa?" the boy said. "Sort of."
"How sort of?" "Well, I think we're about 200 miles from the coast." As the crow flies. As the crow flies. Yeah. It
means going in a straight line. Are we going to get there soon?
Not real soon. Pretty soon. We're not going as the crow flies because crows don't have to follow roads. Yeah. They
can go wherever they want. Yes. Do you think there might be crows somewhere? I don't know. But what do you think? I think it's unlikely.
Could they fly to Mars or someplace? No, they couldn't because it's too far. Yes.
Even if they wanted to. Even if they wanted to. What if they tried and they just got halfway or something and then
they were too tired? Would they fall back down? Well, they really couldn't get halfway because they'd be in space
and there's not any air in space, so they wouldn't be able to fly. And besides, it'd be too cold and they'd freeze to death.
Oh,
[laughter]
this book has very few moments of brevity. The O is probably the funniest moment in the story, which is sad.
Anyway, they wouldn't know where Mars was. Do we know where Mars is? Sort of.
If we had a spaceship, could we go there? Well, if you had a really good spaceship and you had people to help you, I suppose you could go.
Would there be food and stuff when you got there? No, there's nothing there. Oh. [laughter]
I see now earlier why the dad would just lie to him. Why not be like, "Yeah,
there's crows on Mars. It's where they all went. It's where all the dogs and cats went, too." They sat for a long time. They sat on their folded blankets and watched the road in both directions.
No wind, nothing. After a while, the boy said, "There's not any crows, are there?" "No, just in books." "Yes, just in books."
I didn't think so. Are you ready? Yeah.
They rose and put away their cups and the rest of the crackers. The man piled the blankets on top of the card and fastened the tarp down. Then he stood
looking at the boy. "What?" the boy said. "I know you thought we were going to die." "Yeah, but we didn't." "No."
"Okay. Can I ask you something?" "Sure.
If you were a crow, could you fly up high enough to see the sun? Yes, you could. I thought so. That'd be really neat. Yes, it would. Are you ready?
Yeah. He stopped. What happened to your flute? I threw it away. You threw it away? Yes.
Okay. Okay. For one, a heartbreaking notion that we may not have realized that the boy's never seen the sun before. All the more heartbreaking by
his misunderstanding of crows and space and Mars and other things he's heard from pieces from his dad, but he doesn't know the full breath of. Also can't help
but be sad by the mention that he threw the flute away. It's like in a small way he's losing some of his innocence or his wonder lust for the world around him. If
the metaphor from earlier is to be applied, perhaps the flute player realized the band went missing. They come to a place to camp for the night.
The father says it'd be smart to camp near the top of the hill because most people don't stop at the top of hills. Then while talking, the boy says this.
He looked at his father. What are our long-term goals? He said, "What our long-term goals?" "Where did you hear
that?" "I don't know." No. Where did you when a long time ago?
What was the answer? I don't know. Well,
I don't either. Come on, it's getting dark. There's something so funny about that. There was a moment back when they were taking a bath when they found the
bunker where the boy said, "Ah, warm at last." And the father was like, "Where where'd you getting these phrases from?"
And now here he says, "Long-term goals."
And I love the dad interrogating him like, "No, who told you? Where are you?
How do you even know that's a phrase people say?" But it's refreshing to not only see the rejuvenation they got from being in the bunker, but now it's lifted
their spirits and the boys talking like a kid again. The next day, as they continue down the road, they look and in the distance, they see someone walking.
This person's walking the same direction they are, but they're bent, shuffling,
and slow. Father tells their son that it might be a decoy, so they need to keep their space. As they get closer, they see that this is just a feeble old man.
He has an old backpack with bedding across the top of it, and he's walking with a cane. When he sees the father and son, he simply moves over to the side of
the road. He has a towel wrapped around his jaw as if he has a bad toothache.
And according to the story, even by their current standards, he smell terrible. As you could imagine, the boy almost immediately becomes enamored by him. First thing the old man says is
that he doesn't have anything worth stealing, but they can take a look. The father says that they're not robbers. So, the old man asks, "What are they?"
It seems that the old man has existed this long because he's simply not worth bothering. He doesn't pose a danger to the murder cult. He doesn't have any supplies worth killing for. And aside
from cannibalism, there's not a lot of groups that would get something out of capturing him. Or maybe even the cannibals wouldn't want him. Maybe that's how bad he smells. The father gets close to the old man, and the old
man sits down. If they were previously desperate, then this old man is super desperate. He doesn't seem to have shoes, just old cloth that he's bound around his feet over and over again.
He's wearing multiple layers of clothes because every layer has holes in them.
Says when he sits down, it looks like a pile of rags. They came forward and stood looking down at him. Sir, the man said. Sir. The boy squatted and put a hand on his shoulder. He's scared, Papa.
The man is scared. He looked up the road and down. If this is an ambush, he goes first, he said. "He's just scared, Papa.
Tell him we won't hurt him." The old man shook his head from side to side, his fingers laced in his filthy hair. The boy looked up at his father. "Maybe he
thinks we're not real. What does he think we are? I don't know. We can't stay here. We have to go. He's scared.
Papa, I don't think you should touch him. Maybe we could give him something to eat. He stood looking off down the
road. Damn, he whispered. He looked down at the old man. Perhaps he'd turn into a god and they trees. All right, he said.
That line, perhaps he turned into a god and they trees. Oh my gosh, McCarthy.
Cuz this moment feels so much like an old fairy tale. I mean, how many stories do you know that have a good Samaritan type of message? Travelers go down the
road and they see an old man starving for food. And if they reject him,
they're punished. If they give him something, they're blessed. This is a world without fairy tales. But from the scenario with his young boy such a picture of hope, asking that they give the man some of their precious food,
this might as well be a fairy tale.
Perhaps he turns into a god in the trees. For the sake of the boy and the way he sees the world, he better give him some food. And who knows what all this old man's seen. Maybe he does think
they're spirits or demons or angels or whatever. So, the dad gets a can of fruit cocktail and hands it to the boy to give to the old man, who I guess the
boy is now acting as his translator. And the boy says, "What about a spoon?" And the dad quickly remarks, "He's not getting a spoon." The story says that
the boy trying to get the old man to take the can was like someone trying to feed a vulture broken in the road. And then standing on the side of the road,
this interaction plays out. The juice ran down his filthy beard. He lowered the can, chewing with difficulty. jerked his head when he swallowed. "Look,
Papa," the boy whispered. "I see," the man said. The boy turned and looked at him. "I know what the question is," the
man said. "The answer is no." "What's the question? Can we keep him?" "We can't." "I know." You know?
Yeah. Yeah. All right. Can we give him something else? Let's see how he does with this.
They watched him meet. When he was done,
he sat holding the empty tin and looking down into it as if more might appear.
What do you want to give him? What do you think he should have? I don't think he should have anything. What do you want to give him? We could cook
something on the stove. He could eat with us. You're talking about stopping for the night. Yeah. He looked down at the old man and he looked at the road.
[sighs] All right, he said, but then tomorrow we go on. The boy didn't answer. That's the best deal you're
going to get. Okay. Okay means okay. It doesn't mean we negotiate another deal tomorrow.
What's negotiate? It means talk about it some more and come up with some other deal. There is no other deal. This is
it. Okay. Okay. This interaction plays out exactly like a child finding a dog on the side of the road. Can we keep it?
No. Well, can it stay with us for a little while? Yes. But then it has to go home. Okay. I mean, it's obviously tragic cuz this is an old man who's
probably lost everyone and is now crazed or broken on the side of the road. But because of the interaction between the father and son, it's hard not to see it
as at least a little bit hopeful. The man took the tin from him and slung it into the woods. The old man tried to hand him the cane, but he pushed it
away. When did you last eat? He said. "I don't know. You don't remember?" "I ate just now.
Do you want to eat with us? I don't know. You don't know. Eat what?
Maybe some beef stew with crackers and coffee.
What do I have to do? Tell us where the world went. What? You don't have to do anything. Can you walk? Okay.
I can walk. He looked down at the boy.
Are you a little boy? He said. The boy looked at his father. What does he look like? His father said.
I don't know. I can't see. Good. Can you see me? I can tell someone's there.
Good. We need to get going. He looked at the boy. Don't hold his hand, he said.
He can't see. Don't hold his hand. Let's go. Where are we going? The old man
said. We're going to eat. He nodded and reached out with his cane and tapped tentatively at the road.
How old are you? I'm 90. No, you're not. Okay. [laughter]
[laughter] Something about the dry delivery of like the boy saying, "Oh." And this little man's like, "I'm 90." And the dad says, "No." And he's like,
"Okay, I guess you know more than me,
man. I just met." Okay. Is that what you tell people? What people? Any people, I guess. So, so they won't hurt you? Yes.
Does that work? No. What's in your pack?
Nothing. You can look. I know I can look. What's in there? Nothing. Just some stuff. Nothing to eat. No.
What's your name? A lie. A lie. What?
What's wrong with a lie? Nothing. Let's go.
The one person they found in the world is absolutely incapable of a conversation. You know, as a fan of
McCarthy's work, one of my favorite things he does is when he takes characters that are representative or at
least evoke different ideologies or upbringings or characters that are effectively stands for thoughts or
concepts, right? That was one of my favorite details of Blood Meridian. You had the kid who was witnessed to all kinds of crazy characters and conversations. like in the beginning,
the man in the hut describing machines or of course the judge in his many sermons. And we haven't got a lot of that in the road because again, most of
the conversations are between a father and son who have had every conversation like that. The two of them are obviously representative of their own beliefs and
ideas. One being the essence of fatherhood, the other being the essence of innocence, or if not innocence,
goodness in a world that doesn't deserve it. But we haven't had a lot of dialogue outside of the quick conversations between the two, except for here with
the old man, and it leads to one of my favorite scenes in the book. It's also worth noting here, there's an essence to the setup for the conversation that feels so supernatural, so predestined.
Think about it. Under any other circumstance, they would have had to just pass this guy by. Had nothing to do with him. But by chance, the one time they run into this one man, the first
person they've met on the road that isn't trying to kill them or compared to the guy who was hit like by lightning,
not about to die, the first time they meet this guy is the one time they had something to offer after they found all the food from the bunker. So again, like so many other instances in the book,
this feels ordained. It feels purposeful. And I think we see some of that come through in the conversation between the two. After they get done
eating by the fire, the conversation goes as follows. You can't go with us,
you know. The man said, he nodded. How long have you been on the road? I was always on the road. You can't stay in one place.
How do you live? I just keep going. I knew this was coming. You knew it was coming. Yeah, this or something like it.
I always believed in it. Did you try to get ready for it? No. What would you do?
I don't know. People were always getting ready for tomorrow. I didn't believe in that. Tomorrow wasn't getting ready for
them. I didn't even know they were there. I guess not.
Even if you knew what to do, you wouldn't know what to do. You wouldn't know if you wanted to do it or not. Suppose you were the last one left.
Suppose you did that to yourself.
Do you wish you would die? No. But I might wish I had died. When you're alive, you've always got that ahead of
you. Or you might wish you'd never been born. Well, beggars can't be choosers.
You think that would be asking too much.
What's done is done. Anyway, it's foolish to ask for luxuries in times like these. I guess so. Nobody wants to
be here. Nobody wants to leave. He lifted his head and looked across the fire at the boy. Then he looked at the man. The man could see his small eyes
watching him in the fire light. God knows what those eyes saw. He got up to pile more wood on the fire and he raked the coals back from the dead leaves. The
red sparks rose in a shudder and died in the blackness overhead. The old man drank the last of his coffee and set the bowl before him and leaned toward the
heat with his hands out. The man watched him.
"How would you know if you were the last man on earth?" he said.
I don't guess you would know it. You just be it. Nobody would know it. It wouldn't make any difference when you
die. It's the same as if everybody else did too. I guess God would know. Is that it? There is no God. No, there is no God and we are his prophets.
Which just break from the conversation.
One of my favorite lines from the entire book. Okay, we're back in. I don't understand how you're still alive. How do you eat? I don't know. You don't
know. People give you things. People give you things. Yes. To eat to eat.
Yes. No, they don't. You did? No, I didn't. The boy did. There's other people on the road. You're not the only ones.
Are you the only one? The old man peered wearily.
What do you mean? He said. Are there people with you?
What people? Any people? There's not any people. What are you talking about? I'm talking about you. About what line of
work you might be in. The old man didn't answer.
I suppose you want to go with us. Go with you? Yes. You won't take me with you. You don't want to go? I wouldn't
have even come this far, but I was hungry. The people that gave you food, where are they?
There's not any people. I just made that up. What else did you make up? I'm just on the road the same as you. No different. Is your name really a lie?
No, you don't want to say your name. I don't want to say it. Why? I couldn't trust you with it to do something with
it. I don't want anybody talking about me to say where I was or what I said when I was there. I mean, you could talk
about me maybe, but nobody could say that it was me. I could be anybody. I think at times like these, the less said
the better. If something had happened and we were survivors and we met on the road, then we'd have something to talk about. But we're not, so we don't.
Maybe not.
You just don't want to say in front of the boy, "You're not a shill for a pack of road agents. I'm not anything. I'll
leave if you want me to. I can find the road. You don't have to leave. I've not seen a fire in a long time.
That's all. I live like an animal. You don't want to know the things I've eaten. When I saw that boy, I thought
that I had died. You thought he was an angel.
I didn't know what he was. I never thought to see a child again. I didn't know that would happen. What if I said that he's a god?
The old man shook his head. I'm past all that now. Have been for years. Where men can't live God's fair no better. You'll
see. It's better to be alone. So I hope that's not true what you said because to be on the road with the last God would
be a terrible thing. So I hope it's not true. Things will be better when everybody's gone. They will. Sure they will. Better for who? Everybody.
everybody. Sure, we'll all be better off. We'll all breathe easier. That's good to know. Yes, it is. When we're all
gone at last, and there will be nobody here but death, and his days will be numbered, too. He'll be out in the road there with nothing to do, nobody to do
it to, you'll say, "Where did everybody go?" That's how it will be. What's wrong with that?
In the morning, they stood in the road,
and he and the boy argued about what to give the old man. In the end, he didn't get much. Some cans of vegetables and a fruit. Finally, the boy just went over
to the edge of the road and sat in the ashes. The old man fitted the tins into his knapsack and fastened the straps.
"You should thank him, you know," the man said. "I wouldn't have given you anything." "Maybe I should. Maybe I
shouldn't. Why wouldn't you? I wouldn't give him mine. You don't care if it hurts his feelings. Will it hurt his feelings?" No, it's not why he did it.
Why did he do it? Looked over at the boy, looked at the old man.
You wouldn't understand, he said. I'm not sure I do. Maybe he believes in God.
I don't know what he believes in. He'll get over it. No, he won't. The old man didn't answer. He looked around at the day.
You won't wish us luck either, will you?" the man said. "I don't know what that would mean, what luck would look
like. Who would know such a thing?" And all went on. When he looked back, the old man had set out with his cane,
tapping his way, dwindling slowly on the road behind them like some storybook peddler from an antique time. Dark and bent, spiderth thin, and soon to vanish
forever. The boy never looked back at all.
Okay, there's so much to talk about with that conversation. For one, it's clear that the old man has some light form of derangement, but who doesn't nowadays
besides the boy talking about how he always knew the end was coming, how it'd be better if everyone died, how when he saw the boy, he thought he was dead. But
to me at least, what I really think the old man represents is what the father would be without the boy. You know,
besides dead. And I think one of the places that's most evident is how the two of them speak of God. You may not call the father explicitly a Christian
or religious, but he does have a belief in a higher power. He does have some form of belief in the capital G God. I mean, from the outside of the book, he
said, "If the child were not the word of God, then God never spoke. But here's the child, so clearly God has spoken."
And here in the conversation with the old man, he brings God up. He said, "God would know when everyone had died." To which the old man encounters says that God is dead and we are his prophets.
It's one of my favorite lines in the book, not only because it sounds hard,
but also because it's such an encapsulation of the world therein. Sure, humanity used to mean something,
but look at it now. We serve as the final monuments of an empire that used to be. We're Azymandas in the desert. If
there ever was a god, he's dead now, and we're just the remnants left behind,
carrying on for some unexplicable reason. The way the old man sees death,
too, is interesting. He sees it as a comfort, but doesn't necessarily wish himself dead. When the father says,
"Perhaps you just wished you were never born." The old man says, "Beggars can't be choosers." It seems at the brink of death, all anyone wants to do is live.
But now in this world of misery, it seems all anyone wants to do is die. But if you beg to be here, if you've survived for this long, what's the point
in stopping now? It's such a lair attitude to life, to continuing to exist. Something that's understandable for the old man and could also be
understandable for the father if he didn't have the boy. I think too that the way the father speaks to the old man shows that a lot of the musings the
stories had about the boy and about his saintthood are thoughts the father has had to himself. As here in front of the old man, he says, "What if I told you he
was a god?" The old man remarking that that would be miserable because then the gods are doing no better than we are. If the boy is an image of saintly perfection, then he's stuck here with
the rest of us. The old man takes comfort in the idea that soon everyone will be gone because then at least everyone's suffering will be over. I
think the commonality between the two men say for the boy is really hammered down in their final moments when the father says he wouldn't have given him
any food and the old man says he wouldn't have given any food either. But because of the boy, the father is almost upset that this old man in a world as brutal as this would hurt his feelings.
But then remarks to the old man and then immediately to himself that whatever that boy's got going on, something the old man wouldn't understand, the father
doesn't either. But when the old man remarks that he'll get over it, the father quickly responds, "No, he won't."
If the bunker was a physical reset of the men's metabolism, of their state of being, then I feel like this meeting
with the old man was a spiritual one for the father. Right before they left the bunker, the father was in a bad place.
He had had the dream of the monsters that he couldn't make out, and he thought that perhaps it's better not to tell his son of how the world used to be because then he'd have to see all the
loss that came with it. But then this interaction with the old man pushes him to remember he's got something special,
something that this man doesn't understand and something he doesn't either. Whatever he's got, he won't stop believing in. It's almost like a wash away of the bad dreams, of the spirit,
of the musings from the grave that have been plaguing his mind and his dreams.
It's almost as if the story or this omnisient narrator is grabbing him by the collar and saying, "Remember what you have now. Keep going." And I think
this lesson has doubled down to the next conversation the boy has with his father. In the early afternoon, they spread their tarp on the road and sat and ate a cold lunch. The man watched him. "Are you talking?" he said. "Yes,
but you're not happy." "I'm okay. When we're out of food, you'll have more time to think about it." The boy didn't
answer. They ate. He looked back up the road. After a while, he said, "I know,
but I won't remember it the way you do."
Probably not. I didn't say you were wrong, even if you thought it. It's
okay. Yeah. The man said, "Well, there's not a lot of good news on the road in times like these.
You shouldn't make fun of him." "Okay,
he's going to die." "I know. Can we go now?" "Yeah," the man said. we can go.
The father is still kind of bitter at his son. He's not happy that his son gave the man the food or heavily encouraged the father to give the man the food. Almost poking fun at him,
saying there's not a lot of good news on the road these days. But the son still has that goodness. He doesn't want his father to make fun of the old man, someone who will be dead soon anyway.
And I especially like the line when the father is talking about how when they run out of food, we'll have time to think about the food we gave to the old man. And the son says, "I won't remember
it the way you do. Because even if they're starving, even if they're suffering, the son will remember a kindness he got to do." Something that's
rare in this world. That night, the father sneaks away from camp and begins coughing a lot. Through the blood and fle, he says, "I'm going to die. Tell me
how I am to do that." It's like over the last series of events, we've had the commission given to the father once again. You have food. You're energized.
There are people out here in the world and your son is going to want to help him. That is something special and you are dying. Do something about it. They took a large propane tank from the bunker in order to warm their food.
However, the next day when the father goes to light it, the tank's empty. They ate a cold supper of cornbread and beans and Frank's from a tin. The boy asked him how the tank had gone empty so soon,
but he said that it just had. You said it would last for weeks. I know, but it's just been a few days. I was wrong.
made in silence. After a while, the boy said, "I forgot to turn off the valve,
didn't I? It's not your fault. I should have checked." The boy had his plate down on the tarp. He looked away. It's
not your fault. You have to turn off both valves. The threads were supposed to be sealed with Teflon tape or would leak, and I didn't do it. It's my fault
I didn't tell you. There wasn't any tape, though, was there? It's not your fault. It's a little thing, but I
appreciate the father even in a moment that would obviously be distressing and uh it would be understandable to get a
little bit angry. He doesn't. Yes, it was his son's fault for not turning off the valve, but the father simply says,
"It's not your fault." I mean, it's not like yelling at his son's going to refill the tank. Even in their interactions between each other, it's nice to see when the father understands
the preciousness of the boy. And I'm sure the boy understands he shouldn't have done that. Also, because I have to mention this, in one description, as they're just walking through the
countryside, it says, "Farmm houses in the fields scoured of their paint, and the clabarded spooned and sprung from the wall studs, all of it shadowless and
without feature. The road descended through a jungle of dead kudzu, a marsh where the dead reads lay over the
water." I just had to read that because kudzu mention, and if this apocalypse is deadly enough to kill that stuff, then
it's the real deal. As they're walking through the woods one day, the boy excitedly points out that there's an old train. The father gives the pistol to the boy and goes at the train to
investigate. Seems that back when everything broke out, a group of people were trying to take this train down south. This seems to be where they ran out of fuel, took all their stuff, and
left. There's nothing in here worth scavenging, but the father brings his son into the train car anyway. They went through the last of the cars and then walked up the track to the locomotive
and climbed up to the catwalk. Rust and scaling paint. They pushed into the cab and he blew away the ash from the engineer's seat and put the boy at the controls. The controls were very simple.
Little to do but push the throttle lever forward. He made train noises and diesel horn noises, but he wasn't sure what these might mean to the boy. After a
while, they just looked out through the silted glass to where the track curved away in the waste of weeds. If they saw different worlds, what they knew was the
same. that the train would sit there slowly decomposing for all eternity and that no train would ever run again.
Can we go, Papa?
Yes, of course we can. A lot of the ideas of the book are encapsulated there. The father wanting to show his son a fun time, speaking of things in a
world now lost that probably don't mean anything to the boy, like horns and engine noises. And the both coming to the conclusion that there will never be
a train running again. They continue to walk. They make it through small towns where many have died, where the remnants of old stirs and carnage once was. Over
the weeks, their food supply begins to deplete, and along this route to the coast, it seems everything's been scavenged. Eventually, they find a town
with a phone book, and once they find the name of the town, they pull out their pieces of map and see how far they are from the coast. The dad remark that it's probably another two weeks journey.
The boy asks if the sea is blue, and the dad says, "It used to be." He watches his son look at their location on the map and draw lines around them. This
pleases the father. Reminds him of when he was a boy and did the same with the map their home, going through the phone book and finding their family and seeing
how far it was to get from one town to the other. Now his son's doing the same with locations only he knows. Book refers to this as everything in its
place justified in the world. One night they sleep underneath the tin shed as it begins to rain. When he woke the fire had burned down and it was very cold.
The boy was sitting up wrapped in his blanket. What is it? Nothing. I had a bad dream. What did you dream about?
Nothing. Are you okay? No. Put his arms around him and held him. It's It's okay.
He said, "I was crying, but you didn't wake up." "I'm I'm sorry. I was just so tired." "I meant in the dream." Again,
we see more of that preciousness, more of the livelihood in the boy begin to vanish away. His nightmares of windup toys have now turned into nightmares of
his father dying. A reality that it seems both of them are beginning to realize isn't that far away. There's a mention after this where they come to an
old retro drugstore still intact. At first, he admires how everything's still in one piece. It looks like a place,
aside from it being looted, that could still be a hangout until he notices a human head lying on the counter. Even brief moments of something pretty in this world are underlined with carnage.
The son asks the father, "Where are all the other good guys at?" And the father says, "They're out there. They're just hiding." After the son begrudgingly says, "Okay." The father asks if his son
believes him. And the son says, "Yes, I do. I have to. I mean, without the father, what else is there for the son to believe or to listen to?" Shortly
after this, while walking through the road, three men step out from behind a destroyed truck. They're all holding links of pipe and ask what he's got in
the shopping cart. The man takes the pistol and aims it at them. They move off at the road and the man has the boy take the cart as he aims the gun backwards towards them. Aside from
moving out of the way, these three seem unfaced by the gun. All stand there in silence watching him till the two of them are out of sight. The father turns
around and they continue on again. Aside from the old man and perhaps even him,
everyone who's out here has made their living with theft and murder. Shortly after this, the father becomes sick. Not his normal bout of coughing and blood,
something more terminal. This seems to be a short-term fever, so the two of them have to hunger on the side of the road for some time as the father sleeps.
In this state, his dreams return. His dreams brightened. The vanished world returned. Kin, long dead, washed up and
cast fa sideways looks upon him. None spoke. He thought of his life so long ago. A gray day in a foreign city where
he stood in a window and watched the street below. Behind him on a wooden table, small lamp burned. On the table,
books and papers. It begun to rain and a cat at the corner turned and crossed the sidewalk and sat beneath the cafe awning. There was a woman at the table
there with her head in her hands. Years later, he'd stood in the charred ruins of a library where blackened books lay in pools of water, shelves tipped over.
Some rage at the lies arranged in their thousands row on row. He picked up one of the books and thumbed through the heavy bloated pages.
He'd not have thought the value of the smallest thing predicated on a world to come. Surprised him that the space which
these things occupied was itself an expectation. He let the book fall, took a last look around, and made his way out
into the cold gray light. This dream almost seems to be a writing from McCarthy himself. We take books, we take stories for granted. But in a world
where humanity is dying, the tales of what we used to be are all the more precious. Dreams of simply sitting at a table and writing seem like paradise
compared to a world of bloated books and lost stories. The father seems to have another dream of something that happened to him when he was the boy's age. At
that age, he was with a group of men who found a den of serpents in the winter.
The men poured gasoline on the serpents and lit them ablaze. It seems the father is having dreams of things that were sacred then and things that mean something now. This idea of the serpents
burning reminds me so much of the line from earlier that perhaps there's more punishment than crime in the world. I mean, it seems everything around them is
burning up. And it seems that several of the people out here certainly deserve it. Perhaps to whatever god or gods exists, they're just serpents in a den.
One night, the boy woke from a dream and would not tell him what it was. You don't have to tell me, the man said.
It's all right. I'm scared. It It's all right. No, it's not. It's just a dream.
I'm really scared. I know. The boy turned away. The man held him. Listen to
me, he said. What? When your dreams are of some world that never was or of some
world that never will be and you are happy again, then you will have given up. Do you understand? And you can't
give up. I won't let you. Again, it seems the father is projecting the own ideas he's had, the dreams he's seen. At some point, despite his illness, they
need to continue. The father gets behind the cart and pushes weak and covered in his own diarrhea. Eventually, they come to a point in the road where it seems
when everything fell apart, everything was on fire. There are first abandoned and burned out cars, and then abandoned and burned out belongings, and then
eventually burned people lying half charred and skeletonized in the road. A mile on, and they began to come upon the dead, figures half- mired in the black
top, clutching themselves, mouths howling. He put his hand on the boy's shoulder. "Take my hand," he said. "I don't think you should see this."
"What you put in your head is there forever." "Yes, it's okay, Papa. It's okay. They're already there. I don't
want you to look. They'll still be there." He stopped and leaned on the cart. He looked down the road and he looked at the boy, so strangely untroubled. "Why don't we just go on?"
The boy said. Yes. Okay. They were trying to get away,
weren't they, Papa? Yes, they were. Why didn't they leave the road? They couldn't. Everything was on fire. Again,
I think this visual being seen right after the dreams of the burning snakes is telling. But also, the boy's right.
And he's seeing everything. It doesn't matter if he looks away, they'll still be there. In instances like this, I think the father is more troubled than the son. Cuz the father remembers what
the world used to be. He remembers that things like this aren't supposed to happen. But to the boy, this is just what happens. The boy's kindness is not because he's weak or because he's
ignorant, but because he's the opposite of both of those things. He sees the world for what it is, and he sees that he can be better. Walking through this,
the father worries what the boy thinks about until he looks at the boy and realize the boy is only looking at him. The father is what the boy thinks about.
While eating the next day, the man thinks they're being followed. So they hide the cart and get up on a hill next to the road to see who it is. He was
almost asleep himself when he saw a figure appear at the top of the road and stand there. Soon two more appeared, then a fourth. They stood and grouped.
Then they came on. He could just make them out in the deep dusk. He thought they might stop soon, and he wished he'd
found a place further from the road. If they stopped at the bridge, it'd be a long, cold night. They came down the road, crossed the bridge. three men and
a woman. The woman walked with a waddling gate, and as she approached, he could see that she was pregnant. The men carried packs on their backs, and the woman carried a small cloth suitcase.
All of them wretched looking beyond description, their breath steaming softly. They crossed the bridge and continued on down the road and vanished one by one into the waiting darkness.
So, four wretched looking people, one of them a pregnant woman. The four of them will lead to what was undoubtedly the most brutal thing I ever read for a high
school class and also still one of the most brutal things I've read. Period.
Before we get back to them, the next day, the father and son look at their map before they head out. But then the book says this. Do you think that your fathers are watching? That they weigh you in their ledger book against what?
There is no book and your fathers are dead in the ground. This is once again a weird moment of whoever seems to be telling this story speaking directly to
the father or to us the reader. It's almost a put down of the idea that there is some greater power watching them,
judging them against something. Or perhaps it's saying the opposite. It's not your dead fathers that are judging you. It's something else. Something that doesn't care with how you measure up to
the rest of humanity or those that came before you. Something that's just interested in what you do now. It's something that gives more importance,
even if on the surface it seems to be dissuading it of the importance of the father's mission. As they're walking that day, they see smoke rising up into the air. They're getting low on food,
and they can't afford to wait another day on the side of the road. As they're walking around the woods on the perimeter of the fire, they seem to not hear anything, but they can smell
something cooking. After some time, it seems that no one's there anymore. Since the father was holding his gun, he tells the son perhaps they saw him holding the
gun and took off, thinking there's more of them in the woods. But if they were cooking something up there, they can't afford to let it go to waste. So the father and son make their way to the now
abandoned camp. They walked into the little clearing, the boy clutching his hand. They taken everything with him except whatever black thing was skewered
over the coals. He was standing there checking the perimeter when the boy turned and buried his face against him.
He looked quickly to see what had happened. "But what is it?" he said. "What is it?" The boy shook his head.
"Oh, [laughter] Papa," he said. He turned and looked again. What the boy had seen was a charred human infant,
headless and gutted and blackening on the spit. He bent and picked the boy up and started for the road with him,
holding him close. "I'm sorry," he whispered. "I'm sorry." So, those four people from earlier uh were pregnant as
a food source. Now, this could be something you would expect out of the band of marauders that we saw earlier,
the ones that had chained pregnant women as slaves, but this woman wasn't in chains. It leads to the almost more troubling concept that she was in
agreement with this plan. It hits a freeway to make more food. Not a lot to say about this section that the weight of it doesn't say for itself. It is
heavy and a lot. I will say this was absolutely insane to read in a junior English class cuz, you know, we were all in high school. Almost no one, unless
you're weird like me, read the books that were assigned. But I remember the day we read those chapters. I mean, the road doesn't have chapters. We read
those selected pages. And the next day in class when the teacher was discussing it, everyone who wasn't paying attention was like, "Excuse me." So, I mean, yeah,
who expects their teacher to assign a book with, you know, baby cannibalism?
That's absurd, but also perfect for me because now I have this job. After this,
the boy doesn't talk for some time. They go through different towns. They see scavenged buildings. They see dead bodies. And one day, while they're
eating, the boy says this. If we had that little baby, it could go with us. Yes, it could. Where did they find it?
He didn't answer. Could there be another one somewhere? I don't know. It's possible.
I'm sorry about what I said about those people.
What people? Those people that got burned up, that were struck in the road and got burned up. I didn't know that you said anything bad.
It wasn't bad. Can we go now? Okay. Do you want to ride in the cart? It's okay.
Why don't you ride for a while? I don't want to. It's okay. Even with the horribleness of what the boy witnessed,
he is still thinking to himself that if they had found that baby first, could have came with him. You know, it's weird coming back to this story years later.
And it's not just this story. There's a few pieces of media that I remember I would watch or read or whatever when I was like in high school or middle school
and it would be really brutal stuff, you know, depictions of death, murder,
whatever. And you know, when you're a teenager, you eat that up because you don't have a soul yet, I guess. But now,
coming back to things later, there's a lot more that sticks with me and a lot of stuff that didn't bother me then that gets to me now. And I I think just with
being a father now, when rereading the section about the baby on the fire got me a lot. And I think it's because when
you read things sometimes, or at least I did when I was younger, you don't really attribute too much weight to them. It's all kind of sightseeing, you know,
brutality for the sake of the entertainment or, you know, the impact of it or the brunt, the jump scare of it. But now thinking about how many
things in the human mind have to be different and how many things have to be made awful for something like that to come to be, it's harrowing. Not just
with the road. That's just something I found revisiting stories. Now, at this point in my life, there's a lot of things that had a weight to it that I didn't appreciate then, but I feel now.
But there's something about the boy seeing all of that and the first thing he does is remark that he wishes they could have taken care of the baby and then remarking that he felt bad about
what he said about the people in the road when all he said as we read is that they're still there even if he closes his eyes. It wasn't anything bad, but
similar to the people he wanted to thank who put the food in the bunker together.
It just wasn't reverence. It's not enough for the boy to not be crude. He must actively be well. As they're walking, they run out of food, and after
a couple of days, they're starving. They see a large house off the road about a mile away. The father begins to stash the cart so that they can go check it
out. They won't be able to make it back before dark, but they can stay in the house for the night. We have to take a look. We have no choice. I don't want
to. We haven't eaten in days. I'm not hungry. No, you're starving. I don't want to go there, Papa. There's no one
there. I promise. How do you know? I just know they could be there. No,
they're not. It'll be okay. Again, given their track record with things they found in houses, it's understandable that the boy would be afraid. But again,
it's that idea that the boy doesn't like the ruins of the world he lives in. As they're walking up to the house, the father finds an old arrow head and gives
it to the boy. As he keeps walking, he finds more artifacts in the ground, like coins, flint. As he's doing this, he looks up and sees that the boy is
beating him on the way to the house, and the sun's about to set. So, the father drops what he's doing and hurries on. I like this moment because it almost feels like the father is the one being the
child. He remembers collecting arrowheads or finding trinkets in the dirt. The boy has no interest in these things and he just keeps moving. It's almost like for a moment, the father
gets to forget where he is. When they get up to the house, the son begs them to not go in. Father says they can wait outside for a moment. As they're sitting
there, the boy sees the front door popped open by a cinder block. Father simply remarks that the people who left the house probably did that as they carried their last things out. boy is
terrified and begs him to not make him sleep in the home. Eventually, they step into the door of what was at once a grand mansion, large staircase and
ported chandelier. Immediately, the boy asks that they not go upstairs. The father says, "Sure, they'll do it tomorrow." The house has empty spots
where paintings once hung, perhaps foolishly taken away by the people in their evacuation or used at firewood at some point in the last several years.
While looking through the pantry in the back, they find some canned vegetables.
But these vegetables are sealed in mason jars. But the father is skeptical that they may have gone bad. Telling the son they don't really have a choice, he says they're just going to cook them really
well. So the father gathers firewood and they build a large fire in the massive fireplace. He breaks open the mason jarge and puts food in pans found in the
kitchen. He uses the fire to light two candles and him and his son have dinner on opposite sides of a large dining room table. As he's eating, the boy is so
tired that he falls asleep. So his father lays him to bed and then falls asleep himself sitting up in the dining room chair. It was cold in the room and
outside the wind was blowing. The windows rattled softly in their frames.
The candle had burned out and the fire was down to coals. He rose and built back the fire and sat beside the boy,
pulled the blankets over him and brushed back his filthy hair. "I think maybe they're watching," he said. "They're
watching for a thing that even death cannot undo. And if they do not see it,
they will turn away from us and they will not come back.
This is such an interesting line and it feels like a response to the line that was said earlier, the one about do you think your fathers are watching? Do you
think they weigh you against what? Maybe not fathers, but again, the gods or the overseers, the oracles of this story,
the father says they're watching for a thing that not even death can undo. of course referring to the boy. A goodness that even if the boy were to die, he
would have something the world could not take from him, the fire. And if that fire were ever to evaporate, then those that are watching would turn away and
not come back. Because then humanity would be true and wholly worthless. But if humanity could make the boy, then maybe it stands for something. The next
morning, the boy tries to convince his father not to go upstairs. The boy didn't want him to go upstairs. He tried to reason with him. "There could be
blankets up there," he said. We need to take a look. I don't want you to go up there. There's no one here. There could
be. There's no one here. Don't you think they'd have come down by now? Maybe they're scared. I'll tell them we won't
hurt them. Maybe they're dead. Then they won't mind if we take a few things.
Look, whatever is up there, it's better to know about it than to not know. Why?
Why? Well, because we don't like surprises. Surprises are scary. We don't like to be scared. And there could be
things up there that we need. We have to take a look.
Okay. Okay. Just like that. Well, you're not going to listen to me. I have been listening to you. Not very hard. There's
no one here. There's been no one here for years. There are no tracks in the ash. Nothing disturbed. No furniture burned in the fireplace. There's food
here. Tracks don't stay in the ash. You said so yourself. Wind blows them away.
I'm going up again. More of the son's fear for houses and what might be in them, but it's also just funny when the son's like, "Well, yeah, you're not
listening very hard." It's the most teenager moment he has in the story.
Upstairs, they find clothes and bedding and other things they can use. They use water from a nearby creek to bathe and cut their hair in one of the bathrooms.
They find new shoes and clothes and blankets, pack them into their cart, and set off. the boy remarking, "We did good, didn't we, Papa?" The book remarks
that the father has no real hope for the coast. Sure, there might be something there. It might be a little bit warmer,
maybe a little bit brighter, but the world's continuing to grow darker every day. It's an objective for now, but not one that's affirmed salvation. All he
knows is it's something different than what they've been through. They're getting low on their supplies and hungry again until eventually finally the story
says then they came upon it from a turn in the road and they stopped and stood with the salt wind blowing in their hair where they lowered the hoods of their
coats to listen. Out there was the gray beach with the slow comrs rolling dull and leen and the distant sound of it
like the desolation of some alien sea breaking on the shores of a world unheard of. Out on the tidal flats lay a
tanker half careened. Beyond that, the ocean vast and cold and shifting heavily like a slowly heaving bat of slag and
then the gray squall line of ash. He looked at the boy. He could see the disappointment in his face. I'm sorry it's not blue, he said. That's okay,
said the boy. So they've made it to the coast, and at the coast there's nothing.
A gray sea and a gray beach with no life but their own. Sure, they've gone south,
so you may be less likely to freeze here, but other than that, what now?
Well, true to form, in the face of adversity, the boy says something uplifting. Do you think there could be ships out there? I don't think so. They wouldn't be able to see very far. No,
they wouldn't. What's on the other side? Nothing. There must be something.
Maybe there's a father and his little boy and they're sitting on the beach.
That would be okay. Yes, that would be okay. And they could be carrying the
fire, too. They could be. Yes. But we don't know. We don't know. So, we have to be vigilant. We have to be vigilant.
Yes. How long can we stay here? I don't know. We don't have much to eat.
I know. You like it? Yeah. Yeah, me too.
Similar to what I said earlier, when I think the route the father took through Tennessee was to just show the child
things that he saw growing up, there's a part of me that can't help but think maybe one of the reasons the father wanted to come out here was so his son could see the ocean. Like, yeah, it
makes sense to travel south and to get away from populated areas, but I mean,
what boy should go their whole life without seeing the sea? And the thing the father says that perhaps there's another man and a boy across the way and
the boy says are they carrying the fire too. There's a greater mission at the back of the mission of survival to carry on something humanity seems to have
forgotten perhaps. Yeah. As they stand on this shore. There's another dad and son on the other shore looking back at them. The boy wants to go for a swim.
The dad says it'll be cold, but the boy wants to do it anyway. The boy goes for a short swim and comes back freezing.
The dad holds him in a blanket trying him off. When he looks at the boy though, the boy's been crying. Father asks what's wrong, but the boy won't tell him. Perhaps the boy's crying
because he got to see the ocean. Perhaps he got to go for a swim in the ocean and have fun. Or perhaps he knows that this,
like everything else, is just an echo of what used to be. There's some grand thing, some memory the father has of the sea, something beautiful he wanted to
share with the boy. It's not there anymore. That night, after the boy goes to bed, the father goes to the shore covered in his blanket. He got up in the
night and walked out and stood on the beach wrapped in his blankets, too black to see, taste of salt on his lips.
Waiting, waiting, and the slow boom falling down shore, the sthing hiss of it washing over the beach and drawing
away again. He thought there could be death ships out there yet, drifting with their lawing rags of sail, or life in
the deep. great squid propelling themselves over the floor of the sea,
the cold darkness, shuttling past like trains, eyes the size of saucers. And perhaps beyond those shrouded swells,
another man did walk with another child on the dead gray sands,
slept but a sea apart on another beach among the bitter ashes of the world, or stood in their rags, lost to the same indifferent son.
He remembered waking once on such a night to the clatter of crabs in the pan where he left steak bones from the night before. Faint deep coals of the
driftwood fire pulsing in the onshore wind lying under such a myriad of stars.
The seas black horizon. He rose and walked out and stood barefoot in the sand and watched the pale surf appear all down the shore and roll and crash
and darken again. When he went back to the fire, he knelt and smoothed her hair as she slept. And he said if he were
God, he would have made the world just so and no different.
It seems that the father did have memories of the beach that in some way he wished were still there. Memories of being with his wife, the her mentioned
once again in the story of spending a night so perfect that if he were God, this is how he would design the world.
Now that world's lost. The only things that may exist are the squid deep amongst the sea or another father in his same predicament across the same ocean.
Seems his nostalgia of the past almost ruins his memory of what's here now. But perhaps there's some small comfort that if there is someone across the sea, at
least he's not the only one. The next day, the two of them make their way down the gray shore. Salty sea smell is nearly gone. A world covered in ash just makes it smell like iodine. Eventually,
they come into a cove and on some shallow rocks is a maroon sailboat. It looks abandoned, but not looted. So, the father has the boy wait by the shore
while he swims out to check on it about 100 ft out. The boy protests this,
doesn't want him to be left alone, but the water's cold and the dad knows it might be dangerous, so he gives the son the pistol and swims out himself. The
book goes into detail of how the father loots everything. The boat, for the most part, seems pretty together. The lockers still contain swimwear and things like
rain jackets and rubber boots. He finds a tool box and amongst all the things they can use, he piles them by the door to transport later. While looking for
food, the story says it occurred to him that he took this windfall in a fashion dangerously close to matter of fact, but still he said what he had said before.
The good luck might be no such thing.
There were few nights lying in the dark that he did not envy the dead.
Regardless, he does find some food on the ship, and it seems they continue to be saved by these random encounters with stoages of food. Something that, as it
says, he begins to almost take for granted. Through all of this, the father keeps going up top to check on his son,
who goes from watching attentively to laying down on the clothes to wandering down the beach holding the pistol. Uses the tools he found to uncouple the burners and gas from the stove. And
daylight is fading now, so he stacks everything near the front door of the ship. Tomorrow, they'll run a line of rope so that he can transport things
back and forth. So, for now, he waits to shore with some of the food he found.
They hurried down the beach against the light. What if the boat washes away? The boy said it won't wash away. It could.
No, it won't. Come on. Are you hungry? Yes. We're going to eat well tonight,
but we need to get a move on. I'm hurrying, Papa. And it may rain. How can you tell? I can smell it.
What does it smell like? Wet ashes. Come on. Then he stopped. Where's the pistol?
He said. The boy froze. He looked terrified.
The man said. He looked back up the beach. They were already out of sight of the boat. He looked at the boy. The boy had put his hands on top of his head and was about to cry. "I'm sorry," he said.
"I'm really sorry." He set down the tarp with the canned goods. "We have to go back." "I'm sorry, Papa. It's okay.
It'll still be there." The boy stood with his shoulders slumped. He was beginning to sob. The man knelt, put his arms around him. "It's all right," he
said. "I'm the one who's supposed to make sure we have the pistol, and I didn't do it. I forgot." "I'm sorry,
Papa. Come on. We're okay. Everything's okay. They run back down the beach until the boat's in sight, and the pistol is lying right where the boy left it. He
cleans the gun out, makes sure that it's still capable of firing, and then they head back towards their camp. However,
it seems they were too late, and the darkness is setting upon them, as is the rain. The rain turns into a storm, and eventually the only thing that they can
use to see are the sudden flashes of lightning over the water. One point, the father tells the boy to pray for lightning, as it's the only way they're going to be able to find their camp,
until eventually the father hears the sound of rain hitting their tarp. Once they found it, they crawled under it and slept like they always have, shivering
cold in the dark. The next day, they go back and begin hauling stuff off of the boat. It's more than they can carry, so the plans to stay by the shore for a few days while they get everything off and
then try to move on to find some more food. That night, as they lay by a fire, their new findings are all around them.
Once again, the father leaves in the night to go cough. And this time the blood is more than usual. The father remarks, "Every day is a lie," he said.
"But you are dying." "That is not a lie." They take all the supplies they found and load them into the cart that's staged just off the sand. The father goes out for one last look at the boat.
In his final look, he realizes that for some reason a cushion's been ripped off one of the seats, meaning that there's likely a compartment under the seat.
Inside is a first aid kit, a flashlight,
a box of flares, and a flare gun with ammo. The flare gun itself had eight rounds. Maybe not as foolproof as the pistol, but most people would hesitate
to be set on fire. When the man comes back to shore, he shows the boy the flare pistol, and the boy's excited. He wants to try it out. So, the father
says, "Tonight, they can fire it over the ocean. Sure, it may be dangerous,
and sure, it may be wasting a round of ammunition, but I mean, the father's almost dead. What else is there other than seeing a single firework with your
son?" The boy remarks that it could be like a celebration. He got dressed and they set out down the beach carrying the last of their plunder. Where do you
think the people went, Papa? That were on the ship. Yes. I don't know. Do you
think they died? I don't know. But the odds are not in their favor. The man smiled. The odds are not in their favor.
No. Are they? No. Probably not. I think they died. Maybe they did. I think
that's what happened to them. They could be alive somewhere, the man said. It's possible. The boy didn't answer. They
went on. They wrapped their feet in sailcloth and bound them up in blue plastic bambooties cut from the tarp and they left strange tracks in their
comingings and goings. He thought about the boy and his concerns. And after a while, he said, "You're probably right.
I think they're probably dead because if they were alive, we'd be taking their stuff. And we're not taking their stuff.
I know. Okay. So, how many people do you think are alive in the world? In the world. Yes.
I don't know. Let's stop and rest. Okay. You're wearing me out. Okay.
They said among their bundles. How long can we stay here, Papa? You asked me that. I know. We'll see. That means not
very long. Probably. The boy poked holes in the sand with his fingers until he had a circle of them. The man watched him.
I don't know how many people there are,
he said. I don't think there are very many.
I know. He pulled his blanket about his shoulders and looked out down the gray and barren beach. What is it? The man
said. Nothing. No. Tell me. There could be people alive someplace else. Where?
Place else? I don't know. Anywhere? You mean besides on Earth? Yes.
I don't think so. They couldn't live any place else. Not even if they could get there. No. The boy looked away.
What? The man said. He shook his head. I don't know what we're doing, he said.
The man started to answer, but he didn't. After a while, he said, "There are people. There are people, and we'll find them. You'll see."
All this time, the father's been building up the ocean. They're going to get to the coast. They're going to get to the south. Now that they have, what's next? The boy's starting to think of more. It's not just immediate survival.
It's what they're doing in the long term. And sadly, the father knows it's a long term. he's not going to be around to see. The next day, the boy begins to write something in the sand and then
suggests maybe they can write a message for the good guys to let them know they're there. The father remarks, "What if the bad guys see it?" And the son says he's right. Father quickly
backpedals and says, "I shouldn't have said that. We could write them a letter," not wanting to hurt the boy's feelings or discourage this. Then the boy says, "That's okay." Again, the
optimism of the boy compared to the pessimism or the realism of the dad. In this world, you probably don't want a passer by to know that you're there. He
loaded the flare pistol and as soon as it was dark, they walked out down the beach away from the fire and he asked the boy if he wanted to shoot it. You shoot it, Papa. You know how to do it.
Okay. He cocked the gun and aimed it out over the bay and pulled the trigger.
Flair arked up into the merc with a long whoosh, broke somewhere out over the water in a clouded light, hung there.
Hot tendrils of magnesium drifted slowly down the dark, and the pale foreshore tides started in the glare and slowly faded. He looked down at the boy's
upturned face. They couldn't see it very far, could they, Papa? Who? Anybody? No,
not far. If you wanted to show where you were. You mean like to the good guys?
Yes. Or anybody that you wanted them to know where you were? Like who?
I don't know. Like God. Yeah, maybe somebody like that. Again, we have the
father reintroducing this idea of God or a god that is watching them on their journey. The boy agrees. Perhaps we fire a flare just to let him know we're here.
The next day, the boy falls ill. At first, it seems to be the same thing the father had. Fever, vomiting. But for the boy, it seems to be worse. And through the day, he doesn't seem to get better.
While holding his son that night, the father says, "I will do what I promised," he whispered. "No matter what, I will not send you into the
darkness alone." implying that if the boy were to die, father would be shortly behind. Thankfully, from the first aid kit, there's some antibiotics and aspirin. So, it may not be prescription,
but it might help how the boy's feeling.
As the father cares for the boy at night, the story speaks to him once again. He went back and sat by the boy and reffolded the cloth, wiped his face,
and then spread the cloth over his forehead.
You have to stay near, he said. You have to be quick so you can be with him. Hold him close. Last Day of the Earth. The
line, "You have to stay near," sounds like it came from the boy. But after that, again, it feels like the narrative is speaking to the father. These are the final moments, and the boy needs you.
Not of the boy's life, but of the man's. For days, the boy sweats and is sick.
One night, the story says, "He tried to stay awake all night, but he could not.
He woke endlessly and sat and slapped himself or rose to put wood on the fire.
He held the boy and bent to hear the labored suck of air, his hand on the thin and lattered ribs. He walked out on the beach to the edge of the light and
stood with his clenched fist on top of his skull, fell to his knees, sobbing in rage. I mean, it's frustrating for any
father to see a child sick that they can't help. Now, imagine that the father knows he'll soon be gone as well, and there will be no one to help the kid.
Rage against the Almighty, rage against creation, rage against itself. It all seems fitting. But eventually the boy seems to pull out of it. Gets his
appetite back and begins to set up and feel better through the day. Boy says he had some weird dreams in this time but nothing more of it. Whatever sages are
speaking to the father are likely speaking to the boy as well. For the boy feels better. The story says they sat that evening by the fire and the boy drank hot soup and the man turned his
steaming clothes on the sticks sat watching him till the boy became embarrassed. Stop watching me, Papa, he
said. Okay. But he didn't. Similar to what the narrative said to the father a moment ago. This is the last days of the
earth. At least the earth as you know it. Saber it. Similar to how when they were walking through the deadinfested roads earlier and the boy just watch the
dad. The dad just wants to watch the boy. One day they walk the other direction as far as they can. Don't find anything and begin to make their way back. But as they get closer to camp,
they see footprints in the sand. The father grabs the pistol and begins to run. The tarp was gone. Their blankets.
The water bottle in their campsite store food. The sailcloth was blown up into the dunes. Their shoes were gone. He ran
up through the swale of sea oats where he left the cart, but the cart was gone. Everything. You stupid ass, he said. You stupid ass.
The boy was standing there wideeyed.
What happened, Papa? They took everything. Come on. The boy looked up. He was beginning to cry. Stay with me,
the man said. Stay right with me. The two of them run off the sand onto the nearby road. The road itself is mostly covered of sand, but there's a few spots
here and there, likely sand from the shopping cart and the feet of whoever stole it. So, the father and son take the wrappings off of their shoes so that
they don't track sand and begin to follow the slight marks of sand they see on the black top. They see a patch of sand that indicates the direction the thief went. And at first, they begin to
run, but when they run, the father has to cough. So, he tells the boy they're going to have to walk because if they hear him coming, they can just hide. The boy asked the father if they're going to kill him, and the dad says they went on.
It was already late in the day, and it was another hour and deep into the long dusk before they overtook the thief.
Then over the loaded cart, trundling down the road before them. When he looked back and saw them, he tried to run with the cart, but it was useless,
and finally he stopped and stood behind the cart holding a butcher knife. When he saw the pistol, he stepped back, but
he didn't drop the knife. "Get away from the cart," the man said. He looked at them. He looked at the boy. He was an
outcast from one of the communes, and the fingers of his right hand had been cut away. He tried to hide it behind him, a sort of fleshy spatula. The cart was piled high. He taken everything.
Get away from the cart and put down the knife. He looked around as if there might be help somewhere. Scrawny,
swollen, bearded, filthy. His old plastic coat held together with tape.
The pistol was a double action, but the man cocked it anyway. Two loud clicks,
otherwise only they're breathing in the silence of the salt Morland. They could smell him in his stinking rags.
If you don't put down the knife, get away from the cart, the man said. I'm going to blow your brains out. The thief looked at the child and what he saw was
very sobering to him. He laid the knife on top of the blankets and backed away and stood. back more. He stepped back again.
Papa, the boy said, "Be quiet." He kept his eyes on the thief.
"Damn you," he said. "Papa, please don't kill the man." The thief's eyes swung wildly. The boy was crying. "Come on,
man. I've I've done what you said.
Listen to the boy. Take your clothes off." "What? Take them off every damn
stitch. Come on. Don't do this. I'll kill you where you stand. Don't do this, man. I won't tell you again. All right.
All right. All right. Just Just take it easy. He stripped slowly and piled his vile rags in the road. The shoes. Come on, man. The shoes.
The thief looked at the boy. The boy had turned away and put his hands over his ears. Okay, he said. Okay. He sat naked
in the road and began to unlace the rotting pieces of leather laced to his feet. Then he stood up holding them in
one hand. Put them in the cart. He stepped forward and placed the shoes on top of the blankets and stepped back.
Standing there raw and naked, filthy,
starving, covering himself with his hand. He was already shivering.
Put the clothes in. He bent and scooped up the rags in his arms and piled them on top of the shoes. He stood there
holding himself. Don't do this, man. You didn't mind doing it to us? I'm begging you, Papa. The boy said, "Come on,
listen to the kid." You tried to kill us. I'm starving, man. You'd have done the same. You took everything. Come on,
man. I'll die. I'm going to leave you the way you left us. Come on. I'm begging you. He pulled the cart back and
swung it around and put the pistol on top and looked at the boy. "Let's go,"
he said. They set out along the road south with the boy crying and looking back at the nude and slat-like creature standing there in the road, shivering
and hugging himself. "Oh, Papa," he sobbed. "Stop it. I can't stop it. What do you think would have happened to us
if we hadn't caught him? Just stop it. I I'm trying." When they got to the curb in the road,
the man was still standing there. There was no place for him to go. The boy kept looking back, and when he could no longer see him, he stopped. And then he just sat down in the road sobbing.
The man pulled up and stood looking at him, ducked their shoes out of the cart,
sat down, and began to take the wrappings off the boy's feet. "You have to stop crying," he said. "I can't." He
put on their shoes, and then stood and walked back up the road, but he couldn't see the thief. He came back and stood over the boy. "He's gone," he said.
"Come on."
"He's not gone," the boy said. He looked up, his face streaked with soot. He's not. What do you want to do? Just help
him, Papa. Just help him. The man looked back up the road. He was just hungry,
Papa. He's going to die. He's going to die anyway. He's so scared, Papa. The man squatted and looked at him. I'm
scared, he said. Do you understand? I'm scared. The boy didn't answer. Just sat there with his head bowed, sobbing.
You're not the one who has to worry about everything. The boy said something, but he couldn't understand him. "What?" he said. He looked up, his
wet and grimy face. "Yes, I am," he said. "I am the one."
So, someone stole their supplies and then they found him. He held a knife in defense, but didn't attack. Most likely only because the father had a gun. Now,
yes, the man did steal their stuff, but he never attacked them. Although, in this world, stealing food might as well be the equivalent to murder. The father
took back what was his, but then in the cold, he stripped the man naked. Most would look at that and see it as an eye for an eye, not the boy. The boy sees this as a man who's hungry, starving.
This is coming from a child who has known hunger and starvation better than most. The father, of course, has no problem taking from this man because of what the man tried to do to them. But
the boy doesn't see it that way. He sees themselves as desperate people and the thief as a desperate person. The father seems to be upset at the boy for not understanding his point of view. When
the father says, "You're not the one who has to worry about everything." But then the boy says, "I am." And of course,
they mean two different things. The father has to worry about food,
protection, keeping them alive. But the boy's worried about something else. He's worried about the fire. There's that line earlier that perhaps whoever is
watching is watching to see if they have something that not even death could take away. And if they ever lose it, they would turn their backs forever. That
something is a goodness and a mercy that goes beyond what the rest of the world knows. Sure, this thief didn't deserve mercy, but that doesn't mean that's not
what the boy wants to hand out. Would the boy say it was right for them to get their stuff back? I'm sure. But in his heart, there's no place for revenge. And again, in a lesser story, this would come off as the boy just being naive.
But the boy knows how awful the world is. He knows that things are still there when he closes his eyes. So when he asks for forgiveness, he must mean it. The
boy convinces the father to go back up the road looking for him, trying to give him his clothes back. After a while of calling out to him, the man doesn't answer, so they just leave his clothes
and shoes piled in the middle of the road. That night, it says they made a dry camp with no fire. He sorted out cans for their supper and warmed them
over the gas burner, and they ate, and the boy said nothing. The man tried to see his face in the blue light from the burner. "I wasn't going to kill him," he
said, but the boy didn't answer. They rolled themselves in the blankets and lay there in the dark. He thought he could hear the sea, but perhaps it was
just the wind. He could tell by his breathing that the boy was awake, and after a while, the boy said, "But we did
kill him." Which, yeah, stripping someone naked in this climate might as well be a death sentence. At least it would be for anyone besides the father
and son who seemed to have someone watching their back. In that sense,
would it be right for the father to kill the thief? I think most would say it would be justified if the father killed the thief as the thief was trying to
take their stuff again. Stealing food is akin to murder. But by the time the father had the food, everything was back in his possession. Was it right to go a
step further? It's certainly understandable and it's certainly something to be expected in this world.
I mean, heck, not killing him right there with his own knife would have been a show of mercy compared to everything else they've seen. But the boy doesn't compare it to everything else he's seen.
That man didn't kill them. that they might have killed him. That night, after the father tries to speak to the son,
who still seems upset, the story says he got up and walked out to the road, the black shape of it running from dark to
dark. Then a distant low rumble, not thunder. You could feel it under your feet, the sound with cognate and so without description,
something imponderable shifting out there in the dark, the earth itself contracting with the cold. It did not come again.
What time of year? What age the child? He walked out into the road and stood. Silence,
the solid drying from the earth. The mudstained shapes of flooded cities burned to the waterline. At a
crossroads, a ground set with dolman stones where the spoken bones of oracles lay mouldering. No sound but the wind.
What will you say? A living man spoke these lines. He sharpened a quill with his small pin knife. Describe these things in slow or lamp black.
At some reckonable and ental my eyes, to seal my mouth with dirt.
This seems to be the father again thinking of how all of this seems to be predestined. Someone wrote these lines.
Something set all of this in place. And whoever this is is coming to steal his eyes and seal his mouth with dirt.
father has an assuredness that they were meant to be out here for something, but it's something that he doesn't think he'll live to see. They worked their way
through a couple of abandoned port towns. Then, the story says, "They wheeled the cart through the back streets and across the railroad tracks and came into the main road again at the
far edge of the town. As they passed the last of the sad wooden buildings,
something whistled past his head and clattered off the street and broke up against the wall of the blocked building on the other side. He grabbed the boy and fell on top of him and grabbed the
cart to pull it to them. It tipped and fell over, spilling the tarp and blankets into the street. In an upper window of the house, he could see a man
drawing a bow on them, and he pushed the boy's head down and tried to cover him with his body. He heard the dull thang of the bow string and felt a sharp hot
pain in his leg. "Ow, you bastard," he said. "You bastard." He clawed the blankets to one side and lunged and grabbed the flare gun and raised up and
cocked it and rested his arm on the side of the cart. The boy was clinging to him. When the man stepped back into the frame of the window to draw the bow
again, he fired. The flare went rocketing up towards the window in a long white arc and then they could hear the man screaming. He grabbed the boy
and pushed him down and dragged the blankets over the top of him. "Don't move," he said. "Don't move and don't look." He pulled the blankets out into
the street looking for the case for the flare pistol. Finally slid out of the cart and he snatched it up and opened it and took out the shells and reloaded the
pistol and breached it shut and put the rest of the loads in his pocket. "Stay just like you are. Stay just like you are," he whispered. He patted the boy
through the blankets and rows and ran limping across the street. He entered the house through the back door with the flare gun leveled at his waist. The house was stripped out to the wall
studs. He stepped through into the living room and stood at the stair landing. He listened for movement in the upper rooms. He looked out the front
window to where the cart lay in the street and then he went up the stairs.
A woman was sitting in the corner holding the man. She taken off her coat to cover him. As soon as she saw him,
she began to curse him. The flare had burned out in the floor, leaving a patch of white ash, and there was a faint smell of burnt wood in the room. He
crossed the room and looked out the window. The woman's eyes followed him, scrawny, lank gray hair.
Who else is up here? She didn't answer.
He stepped past her and went through the rooms. His leg was bleeding badly. He could feel his trouser sticking to his skin. He went back into the front room.
"Where's the bow?" he said. "I don't have it." "Where is it?" "I don't know."
"They left you here, didn't they? I left myself here."
He turned and went limping down the stairs and opened the front door and went out into the street backward watching the house. When he got to the cart, he pulled it upright and piled
their things back in. "Stay close," he whispered. "Stay close." So, following the rule of check off's flare gun, the dad did in fact light someone on fire.
The man was burning in the upper room,
surely in his final moments, and the woman was comforting him. The father says they left you here, and that could have a number of meanings. Perhaps this was a group set to ambush them that
after one of the guys, you know, got lit on fire, left the house, and she was the only one who stuck behind. Or as mentioned earlier with the thief,
perhaps there was a commune nearby that kicked the two out. Regardless, it seems in that moment the two of them were all each other had. But you know, maybe don't fire arrows at a father and son
just walking down the road. They find a garage at the edge of town and lock themselves in. The father asks the boy to get the first aid kit. And at first,
the boy stands there frozen. The father then snaps, "Get the first aid kit, damn it." To which the boy runs, gets it out for him. The father sits there and
stitches up his wound as the boy watches. And once he's done, he says,
"I'm sorry I yelled at you." He looked up. "That's okay, Papa. Let's start over." "Okay." Again, similar to the
propane tank earlier, even if it is the boy's fault or the boy's doing something wrong, like standing there while his dad bleeds, the father doesn't take his anger or frustrations out on the boy.
He's understandably upset as he's, you know, once again shot with an arrow, but he doesn't let that define his relationship with his son. Son's too
precious. The dad tends to his wounds and the story says he spent the day there sitting among the boxes and crates. You have to talk to me, he said.
I'm talking. Are you sure? I'm talking now. Do you want me to tell you a story?
No. Why not? The boy looked at him and looked away.
Why not? Those stories aren't true. They don't have to be true. They're stories.
Yes, but in the stories, we're always helping people. We don't help people.
Why don't you tell me a story? I don't want to. Okay.
I I don't have any stories to tell. You could tell me a story about yourself.
You already know all the stories about me. You were there. You have stories inside that I don't know about.
You mean like dreams?
Like dreams or just things that you think about? Yeah, but stories are supposed to be happy. They don't have to
be. You always tell happy stories. You don't have any happy ones. They're more like real life.
My stories are not. Your stories are not. No. The man watched him. Real life is pretty bad. What do you think? Well,
I think we're still here. A lot of bad things have happened, but we're still here. Yeah.
You don't think that's so great. It's okay.
It seems the father's worst dreams are coming true. The light of his son, his fire, starting to dim. not his love for people or his want to be better, but his
wander, his want to be out there, his want to live. They pulled a workt up to the windows and spread out their blankets, and the boy was lying there on his stomach, looking out across the bay.
The man sat with his leg stretched out.
On the blanket between them were the two pistols and the box of flares. After a while, the man said,
"I think it's pretty good. It's a pretty good story. Counts for something.
It's okay, Papa. I just want to have a little quiet time.
What about dreams? You used to tell me dreams sometimes. I don't want to talk about anything.
Okay.
I don't have good dreams anyway. They're always about something bad happening.
You said that was okay because good dreams are not a good sign.
Maybe. I don't know. When you wake up coughing, walk out along the road or somewhere and I can still hear you coughing.
I'm sorry. One time I heard you crying.
I know. So, if I shouldn't cry, you shouldn't cry either. Okay. Is your leg going to get better?
Yes. You're not just saying that. No,
because it looks really hurt. It's not that bad. The man was trying to kill us, wasn't he?
Yes, he was. Did you kill him? No. Is that the truth?
Yes. Okay. Is that all right? Yes. I thought you didn't want to talk.
I don't. It seems here a bit of the poison that's infected the father is moved on to the son. When he asks his son for a good story, the son says that good dreams are a bad thing, right?
Father, realizing what thought he's put into his son's mind, says he doesn't know. Also, that thing about him not killing the guy. I mean, I guess technically no, he was still alive when
he walked up there, but he set a dude on fire in a post-apocalypse. That's close enough. After a few days, it seems the boys opened up some more. They've made
their way through port cities and seaside towns. One point, the father stops in the road to tear out his stitches. That hurt you, didn't it? The
boy said. Yes, it did. Are you real brave? Just medium. What's the bravest thing you ever did? He spat into the
road of Bloody Flem. Getting up this morning, he said. Really? No. Don't Don't listen to me. Come on, let's go.
The story says that around this time he would awake in the black and freezing waste out of softly colored worlds of human love, songs of birds, and the sun.
Seems that these calls from the grave,
these calls of a world that used to be are getting hard to hold back. It's at this point that the father's journey is coming to an end. He knows it and
tragically seems the boy knows it as well. They continue to walk. The story says he leaned his forehead on his arms, crossed upon the bar handle of the cart,
coughed. He spat a bloody drool. More and more he had to stop and rest. The boy watched him. In some other world,
the child would already have began to vacate from his life, but he had no life other. He knew the boy lay awake in the night and listened to hear if he were breathing.
The day sloth passed uncounted and uncalled. Along the interstate in the distance, long lines of charred and rusting cars,
the raw rims of the wheels sitting in a stiff gray sludge of melted rubber, blackened rings of wire.
The incinerate corpses shrunk to the size of a child and propped on the bare springs of the seats. 10,000 dreams and supplicer within their crossled hearts.
They went on treading the dead world under like rats on a wheel. The nights dead still and dead or black, so cold.
They talked hardly at all. He coughed all the time and the boy watched him spitting blood, slumping along, filthy,
ragged, hopeless.
He'd stop and lean on the cart and the boy would go on and then stop and look back and he would raise his weeping eyes and see him standing there in the road
looking back at him from some unimaginable future glowing in that waste like a tabernacle. So much is
conveyed here from just the wording. The boy has an unimaginable future because the father won't be there for it. But in that waste, in that rot, in the death
and decay and the bodies, the boy might as well be a church. He is our message in a bottle to God or whatever gods are
watching that we met something. That humanity amounted to something. The boy is the closest thing to God's voice this wasteland has. Tragically, his only
profit is dying. Eventually, with all the destroyed cars and the rolling roads, it got hard to continue to push the shopping cart. and they didn't have
enough supplies to justify the shopping cart. So they pack things into their backpack and once again left the cart behind. The father is at death store. He
coughs blood constantly, his ash mask covered in fle. He washes it in old water on the side of the road and his boy watches him. Eventually they come to
a bridge that has collapsed. The boy looks at the father and says, "What are we going to do?" The father remains silent. The boy says again, "Well, what
are we again?" The father has nothing to say. They go to the beach again and find nothing. and they worked their way inland. The story says their progress
was a torture. In two days, when they came out upon a road, he had set the bag down and sat bent over with his arms crossed at his chest and coughed till he
could cough no more. Two more days, and they may have traveled 10 miles. They crossed the river, and a short ways on
they came to a crossroads. Down country a storm had passed over the ismas, and leveled the dead black trees from east
to west like weeds in the floor of a stream. Here they camped, and when he lay down, he knew that he could go no
further, and that this was the place where he would die.
The boy sat watching him, his eyes welling. "Oh, Papa," he said.
He watched him come through the grass and kneel with the cup of water he'd fetched. There was light all about him.
He took the cup and drank and lay back. They had for food single tin of peaches,
but he made the boy eat it and he would not take any. I can't, he said. It's all
right. I'll save your half. Okay, you save it until tomorrow.
He took the cup and moved away. And when he moved, the light moved with him. He wanted to try and make a tin out of the tarp, but the man would not let him. He
said that he didn't want anything covering him. He lay watching the boy at the fire. He wanted to be able to see.
Look around you, he said. There's no prophet in the earth's long chronicle who's not honored here today. Whatever form you spoke of, you were right.
Gosh, man.
There is not a prophet in the earth's chronicle that is not honored here today regardless of religion or creed or
purpose or history. This is what we've been building up to something so perfect our epitap at the end of humanity to see the child who the father sees as so
perfect. He says whatever you spoke of you were right. Anything any disagreement any purpose you saw something I couldn't. You are what the
gods are looking after. It's like he told the old man. At least he gets to travel this broken world with a god. So now with the father dying, the boy
begins to take care of him. Boy goes out the next morning and gathers firewood.
He constructs a leanto to guard him and his dad. He takes the revolver, leaves his dad the flare pistol and goes out looking for food. When the boy comes
back, the story says the man took his hand wheezing. You need to go on, he said. I can't go with you. You need to
keep going. You don't know why it might be down the road. We were always lucky.
You'll be lucky again. You'll see. Just go. It's all right. I can't. It's all right. This has been a long time coming.
Now it's here. Keep going south. Do everything the way we did it. You're going to be okay, Papa. You have to. No,
I'm not.
Keep the gun with you at all times. You need to find the good guys, but you can't take any chances. No chances. you here. I want to be with you. You can't.
Please, you can't. You have to carry the fire. I don't know how to. Yes, you do.
Is it real? The fire? Yes, it is. Where is it? I don't know where it is.
Yes, you do. It's inside you. It's always there. I can see it. Just take me with you, please. I can't. Please, Papa.
I can't. I can't hold my son dead in my arms. I thought I could, but I can't.
You said you wouldn't ever leave me. I know. I'm sorry. You have my whole
heart. You always did. You're the best guy you always were. If I'm not here,
you can still talk to me. You can talk to me and I'll talk to you. You'll see.
Will I hear you? Yes, you will. You have to make it like talk that you imagine and you'll hear me. You have to practice. Just don't give up. Okay.
Okay. Okay.
I'm really scared, Papa. I know. But you'll be okay. You're going to be lucky. I know you are.
I've got to stop talking. I'm going to start coughing again. It's okay, Papa. You don't have to talk. It's okay.
[sighs]
Again, the father knows that the fire is more important than his own life. He's been trying to lay it down for his son at every point in the story. Here, even though the father can't be here anymore,
he has to make sure the fire keeps burning. The boy goes out to look for supplies again, and when he comes back,
his father's asleep. So, the boy lays down next to him and pretends that he's talking to him. tries to imagine what his father would say back, preparing for when his father won't be there anymore.
He awoke in the darkness, coughing softly. He lay listening. The boy sat by the fire, wrapped in a blanket, watching
him. Drip of water, a fading light. Old dreams encroached upon the waking world.
The dripping was in the cave. The light was a candle which the boy bore in a ringstick being copper. The wax
sputtered on the stones. tracks of unknown creatures in the mortified lows.
In that cold corridor, they had reached the point of no return, which was measured from the first solely by the light they carried with them. This is the final dream we get from the father,
and it is a conclusion of the dream. The story opened with the dream of the father being led into the cave by the child and seeing the thing across the
pond. The thing could be representative of death, of extinction, of any negative effect upon the father and son. But here
we see the rest of the dream. That in the father's dream, his son was carrying the candle. There are footsteps of monsters in the dark, but they're not in
the glow of the light. The monsters are out there, but the fire keeps them away.
Then we have the final conversation between the father and son. Do you remember that little boy, Papa?
Yes, I remember him. Do you think that he's all right? That little boy? Oh,
yes. I think he's all right.
Do you think he was lost? No. No, I don't think he was lost. I'm scared that he was lost.
I think he's all right. But who will find him if he's lost? Who will find the little boy?
Goodness, we'll find the little boy. It always has. It will again.
He slept close to his father that night and held him. But when he woke in the morning, his father was cold and stiff.
He sat there a long time weeping. And then he got up and walked out through the woods to the road. When he came back, he knelt beside his father and
held his cold hand and said his name over and over again.
The father's journey is now done.
He took the boy as far as he could. He taught him what he knew. And the boy has now used those things to try to take care of his father. But now let's take
care of himself. But even in this moment of despair, even when the boy knows he's about to be alone, all he can think of
is the other little boy. and what the father says to the boy. His final words are really the underlining for the message throughout the entire novel.
Goodness will find the boy always does.
It seems the father was right because as soon as his time with the boy is over,
goodness finds him once again. He stayed three days and then he walked out to the road and he looked down the road and he looked back the way they had come.
Someone was coming. He started to turn and go back into the woods, but he didn't. He just stood in the road and waited, the pistol in his hand. He piled
all the blankets on his father, and he was cold and he was hungry.
Man that ho into view and stood there looking at him was dressed in a gray and yellow ski parker. He carried a shotgun upside down over his shoulder on a
braided leather lanyard, and he wore a nylon bandelier filled with shells for the gun. A veteran of old skirmishes, bearded,
scarred across his cheek and the bone stoven, the one eye wondering. When he spoke, his mouth worked imperfectly when he smiled.
Where's the man you were with?
He died. Was that your father? Yes, he was my papa. H I'm sorry.
I don't know what to do. I think you should come with me. Aren't you one of the good guys?
The man pulled back the hood from his face. His hair was long and matted. He looked at the sky as if there were anything there to be seen. He looked at
the boy. "Yeah," he said. "I'm one of the good guys." "Why don't you put the pistol away?" "I'm not supposed to let anyone take the pistol no matter what."
"I don't want your pistol. I just don't want you pointing it at me. Okay. Where's your stuff?
We don't have much stuff. Have you got a sleeping bag? No. What have you got? Some blankets.
My papa's rafted them. Show me.
The boy didn't move. The man watched him. He squatted on one knee and swung the shotgun up from under his arm and stood it in the road and leaned on the
fortock. The shotgun shells in the loops of the bandelier were hand loaded and the end sealed with candle wax. He smelled of wood smoke.
Look, he said, you got two choices here.
There was some discussion about whether to even come after you at all. You can stay here with your papa and die, or you can go with me. If you stay, you need to
keep out of the road. I don't know how you made it this far, but you should go with me. You'll be all right. How do I know you're one of the good guys?
You don't. You'll have to take a shot. Are you carrying the fire?
Am I what? Carrying the fire. You're kind of weirded out, aren't you?
No, just a little. Yeah. That's okay.
So, are you what? Carrying the fire? Yes. Yeah, we are.
Do you have any kids?
We do. Do you have a little boy? We have a little boy and we have a little girl.
How old is he? He's about your age. Maybe a little older. And you didn't eat them? No.
You You don't eat people? No, we don't eat people. And I can go with you. Yes, you can.
Okay, then. Okay, that thing I said earlier, the idea that there is a writer almost or there is something overseeing
the story, overseeing that the fire is carried on, that the boy is made well. I think that's on full display here. Even down to the appearance of the man, he's
wearing a parka, a jacket suited for these conditions. He has a shotgun, a weapon rarely seen around here, and the shells are sealed with candle wax. That
in combination with his scar shows he's ingenuity. He knows what he's doing. He has all the signs of a figure the boy can trust. Just like the old man on the
side of the road had all the signs of someone who needed help. And he has a place with a little boy and a little girl. When the father could not be there to make sure the boy was taken care of,
goodness found him anyway. They went into the woods and the man squatted and looked at the gray and wasted figure under the tilted sheet of plywood. Are these all the blankets you have? Yes.
Is that your suitcase?
Yes. He stood. He looked at the boy. Why don't you go back out to the road and wait for me? I'll bring the blankets and
everything. What about my papa? What about him? Can't just leave him here.
Yes, we can. I don't want people to see him. There's no one to see him. Can I
cover him with leaves? The wind will blow him away. C could we cover him with one of the blankets? I'll do it. Go on now. Okay.
He waited in the road and when the man came out of the woods, he was carrying the suitcase and he had the blankets over his shoulder. He sorted through
them and handed one to the boy. Here, he said, "Wrap this around you. You're cold." The boy tried to hand him the pistol,
but he wouldn't take it. You hold on to that, he said. Okay. You know how to shoot it? Yes. Okay.
What about my papa? There's nothing else to be done. I think I want to say goodbye to him.
Will you be all right? Yes. Go ahead.
I'll wait for you. He walked back into the woods.
He walked back into the woods and knelt beside his father. He was wrapped in a blanket as the man had promised and the
boy didn't uncover him, but he sat beside him and he was crying and he couldn't stop. He cried for a long time.
"I'll talk to you every day," he whispered. "And I won't forget, no matter what."
And he rose and turned, walked back out to the road.
We're almost to the end. Um, there's so much about this ending that just ties so many of the themes together so [snorts]
well. And if you can't tell, they kind of hit me, you know, where it counts. Uh, and we'll get to that in a moment,
but we're almost done. We're not told exactly what life is like where the boy ends up, but from the one paragraph we
do get, it sounds okay. The woman, when she saw him, put her arms around him and held him. Oh, she said, I'm so glad to
see you. She would talk to him sometimes about God. He tried to talk to God, but the best thing was to talk to his
father. And he did talk to him and he didn't forget.
The woman said that was all right. She said that the breath of God was his breath, yet though it passed from man to man through all of time.
I remember reading that final line of that paragraph for the first time and I think it changed me as a person. The breath of God was his breath and it
passed from man to man through all of time. That if God speaks through men,
then sometimes it has to look like a father doing everything he can to protect his son. And it has to look like a son who loves his father and doesn't
forget to talk to him. So from what we get, the boy did all right. There's a woman there who talked to him about God,
who talked to him about her father, seem protected, they seem strong. There's a boy his age and a girl his age as well.
Everything went so right for the boy in ways his father couldn't imagine. A future unimaginable. And then there's
one final paragraph that closes out the novel. Once there were brook trout in the streams in the mountains. You could see them standing in the amber current
where the wide edges of their fins wimpled softly in the flow. They smelled of moss in your hand, polished,
muscular, torsional.
On their backs were vermiculate patterns that were maps of the world and its becoming. Maps and mazes of a thing which could not be put back,
not be made right again. In the deep glenns where they lived, all things were older than man. They hummed of mystery.
And with that, we have the conclusion of Cormick McCarthy's The Road. There's a lot of ways to talk about this book, but
I think the one that is the most fitting given my reaction and current emotional state is my personal takeaway and what I think the core of this book really is.
As I talked about throughout this video,
this is a book that I feel so attached to. It's a father from Appalachia writing a book dedicated to his son.
Cormick's son and I were born in the same year. He wrote this story about the place I grew up around. The sites and things he described are things I grew up
with. And it's this story as well as many of his others that pushed me to have a love for storytelling, to have a love for storytelling that I want to
start a YouTube channel. This book has always had deep personal connection with me, but now that I'm a father, it means
all the more. The beginning of the video, I spoke how our English teacher introduced this book to the class is something that was deeply personal to
him. And I remember he told the story that when McCarthy's son was born, and again I don't know if this is true or
not, but this is what I've been told. He said that when McCarthy's son was born,
in an interview, McCarthy said that he held his child in the hospital and he looked out over a gray sky and imagined
that if it came to it, he would do whatever it took to get his son through this world, whatever that world may look like. And that idea flourished to what
the road became. And when my child was born, I was standing at the hospital window and I looked out on the horizon and there was a storm over the
mountains. And in that moment, I remembered the story my English teacher told me of McCarthy and thought to myself, "Of course, who wouldn't?" And
now, since being a father, I read this book again and it meant something different this time. From the beginning of the book, the father is set to die.
One of the first things we learn about him is that he can't stop coughing and he's coughing up blood. From the opening pages, his mortality is made known. From
the opening pages, the only thing that matters is the boy. The father does not know where the road ends. He doesn't know where they're going to end up, and
he doesn't know what's going to become of the son. But all he can do is instill and stoke the fire within his son. I think something that McCarthy felt when
he wrote this book, and something that I'm starting to feel now, is from the opening pages, I'm not going to be around for the last ones. The road goes
on forever. I don't know how it's going to end up, but I do know that goodness will find the boy. The road is one of the most hopeful stories I've ever read.
Drives me up a wall when people talk about this story being depressing and empty and sad. Like, sure, that was what
the world around them was, but that's not what the story was. The story was of a father who saw his son as the voice of God. A tabernacle floating in the middle
of a wasteland. A boy so important that the gods are watching to make sure that he is taken care of. What a hopeful message. The idea that love carries on
after death, that so much hope and cherishment is around this one child that the world will bend over backwards to make sure he's secure. I mean,
throughout the story, there were so many instances of divine providence. Right when they're about to freeze going over the mountains, they reach the break in the gap. Right when the father begins to
become hopeless, they come across the old man. the countless number of times they came across food at the final second, especially the bunker. Even
apples, an extinct fruit that spring up out of the ground to make sure the boys taken care of. What a beautiful idea that this love, this bond is something the world can't take away from them,
regardless of how evil it becomes.
Because that several of the themes of the book are applicable to the real world. Yes, the world does have terrible things in it. Yes, things will be bad,
but that doesn't mean the fire doesn't exist. that doesn't mean it's not worth pushing on. From our opening lines of the story, the father says this is his
commission from God to take care of this child. And in the final lines of the story, the woman tells the boy that his father might as well have been the voice of God. I mean, what would God have done
if not take care of him? And that through history, there were people who carried the fire, people who were the voice of God, passing on goodness to their sons and daughters. God and his
oracles watched over them from the outset of their journey. And along the way, anytime it was too hard, it was made right again. And ultimately, when
the father wasn't there to watch him, he sent his angels into the picture.
Whatever higher power exists in this universe had to be sure that the fire made it out. Because regardless of time, regardless of what state the world is,
whether it be right now or in a post-apocalypse, what else matters? I think this idea of divinity, of some grand design, is perfectly encapsulated in that final paragraph in the book.
talks about how there were trout that were in the mountains. That on the speckles of their back, the mazes and maps of the world were predestined long
before humanity got there. Long before we knew to look, it was already written out. The world may be a maze. It may be treacherous and it may be scary. And a
lot of us won't be around for the end of it, but in the end, goodness finds the boy. Cormick McCarthy ties a lot of themes from one of his stories into the
next. And the story that he wrote before he wrote The Road was No Country for Old Men. originally developed as a screenplay and then as a novel. I talked
about this in one of the earliest videos in my channel, but at the end of No Country for Old Men, the sheriff has a dream of his father riding on horseback
through the mountains. And in that dream, Sheriff Bell says he saw his father carrying a fire out into the dark, out into the cold. That symbolism
has its own weight in that story, but it's so clear how it's applied to this one. Our fathers and their fathers and their fathers before them all carried the fire. Now, in a world of misery,
especially when there's misery and monsters and things that go bump in the night, who are we to make sure that the torch doesn't keep going? And if that
fire is so important, if it's so important that it bends the voice and ear of God, then how could goodness not find it? The road is not hopeful in spite of its setting, but because of it.
In a world so miserable, so close to humanity's extinction, the same thing that matters is what's always mattered.
The carriers of something so sacred will always be sacred, or especially in a world that's forgot what that means.
It's for these reasons that The Road is my favorite book. Not only is it an interesting setting with interesting characters and dialogues and themes, but
it so perfectly executes those uses the theme of fire, the father and son looking out for each other, and it
weaves all of those into this idea of a grander purpose of walking through misery, but with something that matters.
It's a book about endurance, about purpose, about love and hope. And it's a story that I appreciate more every time I come back to it. Like I said, it's one
I've been nervous to cover because it means so much to me. But hopefully I was able to get that across at least a little bit and do the story some
justice. And hopefully you've read the story first and didn't let this be your first experience. But even if you did that, hopefully now it means something to you. The Road is one of those books
that I think a lot of people have heard of, but not as many have read. Sure, in older generations and in times past, I mean, it's incredibly famous book. A lot
of people have read it, but its reputation certainly exceeds it. But as with any other McCarthy story, I think it's one worth reading and one worth dwelling on. So hopefully you guys
enjoyed it. Hopefully this all meant something to you. And I just want to say thank you for watching. There are some other adaptations of The Road that I think are interesting. For example,
there's the visual novel uh that was illustrated by Manu Larsenette. I have a copy of that and it's pretty cool for visualizing a lot of the things in the
book. If you're a fan of the book, I highly recommend it. And there's also the John Hillcoat film that's pretty good. Uh VGO Mortonson does a fantastic
job playing the father. Uh the movie has now sadly late and great Robert Duval in it playing the old man. But while it's
good and John Hill was the director of it, he's the guy who's currently slated to direct Blood Meridian. So, you know,
I want to hype that guy up because I want that movie to be good. There's so much you have to change from a literary
to a visual adaptation of the story that while it's good, I don't think it really holds a candle to the book. Just cuz I
mean, how in a movie do you portray the instances of the writer almost coming out of the page to speak to the father and to speak to the reader or these
musings the father has to himself evoking everything from Job when he says, "Curse God and die to muses to old
epics." I mean, the book itself really feels like another odyssey. You have the father and son traveling on this long voyage, coming across sights and horrors
as they go. And you get some of that when you watch the film, but you don't really get the choir part of it, right?
The part where the story reminisces or really brings up its themes that enhance everything else you're reading. It's just a piece that's so perfectly adapted
to a novel that it's hard for me to see how you could even translate it to a visual format. As a matter of fact,
here's a hot take. I honestly think a Blood Meridian adaptation would hypothetically do better than a road adaptation because a lot of the things
in Blood Meridian are moments of dialogue or visuals that are described.
These are things that can be illustrated on screen, whereas a lot of the stuff in the road is internal monologues or thoughts or sometimes the book musing on
what's happening. So again, I don't hate the movie. I think it's pretty cool. If you're a fan of the book, it's certainly worth watching. But yeah, if you couldn't tell, there's not really
anything that beats this for me. All in all, I've talked for long enough. I hope you guys enjoyed this video. There will be new videos on the way soon. I
promise. Being a father now has caused quite a change in my daily routine, so forgive me if I'm a little behind on some stuff, but hopefully it'll be worth
it when it comes out. And hopefully this video was worth it. I'm certainly nervous and can't wait for everyone to rip me apart for talking about this
story, but oops. They can say I'm bad at literary analysis. They can say I shouldn't be talking about these stories, but what they can't say is I don't got the gumption for it. I mean,
they could say that, but that's probably like the third or fourth thing they'll pick. All in all, I believe that should do it for now. But before I go, I just want to say thank you for watching. I
hope that you enjoyed, especially on a video that means so much to me, and I'll see you in the next one. [snorts] Bye.
Or not really. The video means so much to me. I mean, this is a video I made.
The story I made the video about means so much to me. Not my own video. That sounds pretentious, which I am a
YouTuber, so you know, fair enough.
